---
aliases:
- 2-διάνυσμα
- 2-ベクトル
- Bivecteur
- bivector
- Bivektor
- bivetor
- bivettore
- duvektoro
- бивектор
- دوبردار
- متجه ازدواجي
- দ্বিভেক্টর
- 二重向量
- 이중벡터
has_id_wikidata: Q663908
subclass_of: '[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~multivector,2377336]]'
maintained_by_WikiProject: '[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~WikiProject_Mathematics,8487137]]'
image: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/Wedge%20product.JPG
Commons_category: Bivectors
dv_has_:
  name_:
    ar: متجه ازدواجي
    bn: দ্বিভেক্টর
    ca: bivector
    de: Bivektor
    el: 2-διάνυσμα
    en: bivector
    eo: duvektoro
    es: Bivector
    fa: دوبردار
    fr: Bivecteur
    it: bivettore
    ja: 2-ベクトル
    ko: 이중벡터
    pt: bivetor
    ru: бивектор
    sl: Bivektor
    sv: Bivektor
    zh: 二重向量
---

# [[BiVector]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[WD~Bivector,663908]] 
#is_/similar_to :: [[../../Algebra/Linear_Algebra/Vector_Space/Pseudovector|Pseudovector]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> In mathematics, a **Bivector** or 2-vector is a quantity in exterior algebra or geometric algebra 
> that extends the idea of scalars and vectors. 
> 
> Considering a scalar as a degree-zero quantity and a vector as a degree-one quantity, 
> a bivector is of degree two. 
> 
> Bivectors have applications in many areas of mathematics and physics. 
> They are related to complex numbers in two dimensions 
> and to both pseudovectors and vector quaternions in three dimensions. 
> They can be used to generate rotations in a space of any number of dimensions, 
> and are a useful tool for classifying such rotations.
>
> Geometrically, a simple bivector can be interpreted as characterizing a directed plane segment (or oriented plane segment), much as vectors can be thought of as characterizing directed line segments. The bivector a ∧ b has an attitude (or direction) of the plane spanned by a and b, has an area that is a scalar multiple of any reference plane segment with the same attitude (and in geometric algebra, it has a magnitude equal to the area of the parallelogram with edges a and b), and has an orientation being the side of a on which b lies within the plane spanned by a and b. 
>
> In layman terms, any surface defines the same bivector if it is parallel to the same plane (same attitude), has the same area, and same orientation (see figure).
>
> Bivectors are generated by the exterior product on vectors: given two vectors a and b, their exterior product a ∧ b is a bivector, as is any sum of bivectors. Not all bivectors can be expressed as an exterior product without such summation. More precisely, a bivector that can be expressed as an exterior product is called simple; in up to three dimensions all bivectors are simple, but in higher dimensions this is not the case. The exterior product of two vectors is alternating, so a ∧ a is the zero bivector, and b ∧ a = −a ∧ b, producing the opposite orientation.  Concepts directly related to bivector are rank-2 antisymmetric tensor and skew-symmetric matrix.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bivector) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_Standards/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector|BiVector]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_public/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector.public|BiVector.public]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_internal/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector.internal|BiVector.internal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_protect/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector.protect|BiVector.protect]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_private/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector.private|BiVector.private]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_personal/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector.personal|BiVector.personal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_secret/Mathematics/Geometry/Geometric_Algebra/BiVector.secret|BiVector.secret]] 

