---
title: Arecanae
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Monocotyledons](Monocotyledons.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Monocotyledons
    -   [Alismatanae](Alismatanae.md)
    -   [Aranae](Aranae.md)
    -   [Liliales](Liliales.md)
    -   [Asparagales](Asparagales.md)
    -   [Pandanales](Pandanales.md)
    -   [Dioscoreales](Dioscoreales.md)
    -   Arecanae
    -   [Zingiberanae](Zingiberanae.md)
    -   [Commelinanae](Commelinanae.md)

-   »

# Arecanae

## The palms 

[William J. Hahn](#AboutThisPage)

![Butia paraguariensis](Butia.jpg)

This tree is based on the morphological and cpDNA RFLP studies of Uhl,
et al. (1995) and on the molecular sequence studies of Hahn, et al.
(1995).

Containing group: [Monocotyledons](Monocotyledons.md)

### Introduction

The palms are one of the most distinctive groups of land plants and show
some of the greatest morphological diversity among all monocots. They
are characteristic elements of the tropics and subtropics of the world
where they are of considerable economic and ecological importance.
Well-known members include the coconut (Cocos nucifera), the date palm
(Phoenix dactylifera), the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis), and many
ornamental species. The superorder includes 1 family, 200 genera, and
approximately 2000 species.

### Characteristics

The palms are a readily identifiable group although no consistent
morphological synapomorphies are known for the family. Uhl and
Dransfield (1987) and Uhl, et al. (1995) have identified two principal
diagnostic characters: 1) \"woody\" stems (due to fibrous sclerenchya,
not secondary-growth), and 2) the leaves plicate in bud and later split
in most groups.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Terminal taxa are based on the Major Groups of Moore (1973) and the
updated taxonomy of Uhl and Dransfield (1986, 1987).

### References

Dransfield, J, IK Ferguson, & NW Uhl. 1990. The Coryphoid Palms:
patterns of variation and evolution. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 77:
802-815.

Hahn, WJ, WJ Kress, & EA Zimmer. 1995. Molecular sequence evolution of
the Palmae - A study in deep branch phylogenetics. Amer. J. Bot. 82 (6 -
Supplement): 133.

Moore, HE Jr. & NW Uhl. 1982. Major trends of evolution in palms. Bot.
Rev. 48(1): 1-69.

Uhl, NW & J Dransfield. 1987. Genera Palamarum: A Classification of
Palms Based on the Work of Harold E. Moore, Jr. Allen Press, Lawrence,
Kansas.

Uhl, NW, J Dransfield, JI Davis, MA Luckow, KS Hansen, and JJ Doyle.
1995. Phylogenetic relationships among palms: Cladistic analyses of
morphological and chloroplast DNA restriction site variation. pp 623-661
in: PJ Rudall, PJ Cribb, DF Cutler, and CJ Humphries (eds.)
Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.

##### Title Illustrations

![Butia paraguariensis](Butia_002.jpg)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Butia paraguariensis
  Copyright ::         © 1997 [William J. Hahn](mailto:wjh22@georgetown.edu) 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------