---
aliases:
- "Electronic music"
has_id_wikidata: Q9778
instance_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~music_genre,188451]]"
different_from: '[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~electronica,817138]]'
practiced_by: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~electronic_musician,5358395]]"
topic_s_main_template: '[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Template_Electronica,13501008]]'
topic_s_main_Wikimedia_portal: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Portal_Electronic_music,14615763]]"
described_by_source: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~DDEX_AVS_Data_Dictionary_Version_1,106615149]]"
subclass_of: '[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~music,115484611]]'
IAB_code: 351
exact_match: "http://service.ddex.net/dd/DD-AVS-001/dd/ddex_ElectronicMusic"
equivalent_class: "http://service.ddex.net/dd/DD-AVS-001/dd/ddex_ElectronicMusic"
Amazon_com_browse_node: 11974381
Commons_category: "Electronic music"
subreddit: electronicmusic
short_name: elektronisk
inception: 1920-06 
has_time_started: 1920-06 
image: "http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/1st%20commercial%20Moog%20synthesizer%20%281964%2C%20commissioned%20by%20the%20Alwin%20Nikolai%20Dance%20Theater%20of%20NY%29%20%40%20Stearns%20Collection%20%28Stearns%202035%29%2C%20University%20of%20Michigan.jpg"
---

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> **Electronic music** broadly is a group of music genres that employ electronic musical instruments, circuitry-based music technology and software, or general-purpose electronics (such as personal computers) in its creation. It includes both music made using electronic and electromechanical means (electroacoustic music). Pure electronic instruments depend entirely on circuitry-based sound generation, for instance using devices such as an electronic oscillator, theremin, or synthesizer: no acoustic waves need to be previously generated by mechanical means and then converted into electrical signals. On the other hand, electromechanical instruments have mechanical parts such as strings or hammers that generate the sound waves, together with electric elements including magnetic pickups, power amplifiers and loudspeakers that convert the acoustic waves into electrical signals, process them and convert them back into sound waves that travel through the air to our ears. Such electromechanical devices include the telharmonium, Hammond organ, electric piano and electric guitar.
>
> The first electronic musical devices were developed at the end of the 19th century. During the 1920s and 1930s, some electronic instruments were introduced and the first compositions featuring them were written. By the 1940s, magnetic audio tape allowed musicians to tape sounds and then modify them by changing the tape speed or direction, leading to the development of electroacoustic tape music in the 1940s in Egypt and France. Musique concrète, created in Paris in 1948, was based on editing together recorded fragments of natural and industrial sounds. Music produced solely from electronic generators was first produced in Germany in 1953 by Karlheinz Stockhausen. Electronic music was also created in Japan and the United States beginning in the 1950s and algorithmic composition with computers was first demonstrated in the same decade.
>
> During the 1960s, digital computer music was pioneered, innovation in live electronics took place, and Japanese electronic musical instruments began to influence the music industry. In the early 1970s, Moog synthesizers and drum machines helped popularize synthesized electronic music. The 1970s also saw electronic music begin to have a significant influence on popular music, with the adoption of polyphonic synthesizers, electronic drums, drum machines, and turntables, through the emergence of genres such as disco, krautrock, new wave, synth-pop, hip hop, and electronic dance music (EDM). In the early 1980s, mass-produced digital synthesizers such as the Yamaha DX7 became popular, and MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) was developed. In the same decade, with a greater reliance on synthesizers and the adoption of programmable drum machines, electronic popular music came to the fore. During the 1990s, with the proliferation of increasingly affordable music technology, electronic music production became an established part of popular culture. In Berlin starting in 1989, the Love Parade became the largest street party with over 1 million visitors, inspiring other such popular celebrations of electronic music.
>
> Contemporary electronic music includes many varieties and ranges from experimental art music to popular forms such as electronic dance music. Pop electronic music is most recognizable in its 4/4 form and more connected with the mainstream than preceding forms which were popular in niche markets.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic%20music) 


