
# [[Panama-Canal]] 


> The Panama Canal (Spanish: Canal de Panamá) 
> is an artificial 82-kilometre (51-mile) waterway in Panama 
> that connects the Atlantic Ocean with the Pacific Ocean, 
> cutting across the Isthmus of Panama, and is a conduit for maritime trade. 
> 
> Locks at each end lift ships up to Gatun Lake, 
> an artificial fresh water lake 26 meters (85 ft) above sea level, 
> created by damming up the Chagres River and Lake Alajuela 
> to reduce the amount of excavation work required for the canal. 
> 
> Locks then lower the ships at the other end. 
> 
> An average of 200,000,000 L of fresh water is used in a single passing of a ship. 
> The canal is threatened by low water levels during droughts.
>
> The Panama Canal shortcut greatly reduces the time for ships 
> to travel between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, 
> enabling them to avoid the lengthy, hazardous route 
> around the southernmost tip of South America via the Drake Passage 
> or Strait of Magellan. 
> It is one of the largest and most difficult engineering projects ever undertaken.
>
> Colombia, France, and later the United States 
> controlled the territory surrounding the canal during construction. 
> 
> France began work on the canal in 1881, 
> The project was inspired by the diplomat [Ferdinand de Lesseps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_de_Lesseps "Ferdinand de Lesseps"), 
> who was able to raise considerable funds in [France](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Third_Republic "French Third Republic") 
> as a result of the huge profits generated by his construction of the [Suez Canal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suez_Canal "Suez Canal"). 
> Although the Panama Canal needed to be only 40 percent as long as the Suez Canal, 
> it was much more of an engineering challenge 
> because of the combination of tropical rain forests, debilitating climate, 
> the need for canal locks, and the lack of any ancient route to follow.
> In 1887, [[Eiffel,Gustave]] became involved. The French Panama Canal Company, 
> headed by [Ferdinand de Lesseps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_de_Lesseps "Ferdinand de Lesseps"), had been attempting to build a __sea-level canal__, 
> but came to the realization that this was impractical. 
> The plan was changed to one using [locks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lock_(water_transport) "Lock (water transport)"), 
> which Eiffel was contracted to design and build. 
> The locks were on a large scale, most having a change of level of 11 m. 
> The dense jungle was alive with venomous snakes, insects, and spiders, 
> but the worst challenges were [yellow fever](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yellow_fever "Yellow fever"), [malaria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malaria "Malaria"), and other tropical diseases, 
> which killed thousands of workers; by 1884, the death rate was over 200 per month. 
> steel equipment rusted rapidly in the rainy climate. 
> 
> Eiffel had been working on the project for little more than a year 
> when the company suspended payments of interest on 14 December 1888,
> and shortly afterwards was put into [liquidation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquidation "Liquidation"). 
> The French effort went bankrupt in 1889 
> after reportedly spending US$287,000,000; 
> an estimated 22,000 men died from disease and accidents, 
> and the savings of 800,000 investors were lost
> 
> Eiffel's reputation was badly damaged 
> when he was implicated in the financial and political scandal which followed. 
> Although he was simply a contractor, 
> he was charged along with the directors of the project 
> with raising money under false pretenses and misappropriation of funds. 
> On 9 February 1893, Eiffel was found guilty 
> on the charge of misuse of funds and was fined 20,000 francs and sentenced to two years in prison, although he was acquitted on appeal. 
> 
> The US took over the project in 1904 and opened the canal in 1914. 
> The US continued to control the canal and surrounding Panama Canal Zone 
> until the Torrijos–Carter Treaties provided for its handover to Panama in 1977. 
> After a period of joint American–Panamanian control, 
> the Panamanian government took control in 1999. 
> It is now managed and operated by the Panamanian government-owned 
> Panama Canal Authority.
>
> The original locks are 33.5 meters wide and allow the passage of Panamax ships. 
> A third, wider lane of locks was constructed between September 2007 and May 2016. 
> The expanded waterway began commercial operation on 2016-06-26. 
> The new locks allow transit of larger, Neopanamax ships.
>
> Annual traffic has risen from about 1,000 ships in 1914, when the canal opened, 
> to 14,702 vessels in 2008, for a total of 333.7 million Panama Canal/Universal Measurement System (PC/UMS) tons. 
> By 2012, more than 815,000 vessels had passed through the canal. 
> In 2017, it took ships an average of 11.38 hours 
> to pass between the canal's two outer locks. 
> The American Society of Civil Engineers has ranked the Panama Canal 
> one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panama%20Canal)


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### [Panama-Canal](/_Standards/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.md) 

### [Panama-Canal.public](/_public/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.public.md) 

### [Panama-Canal.internal](/_internal/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.internal.md) 

### [Panama-Canal.protect](/_protect/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.protect.md) 

### [Panama-Canal.private](/_private/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.private.md) 

### [Panama-Canal.personal](/_personal/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.personal.md) 

### [Panama-Canal.secret](/_secret/Earth/Continent/America~Central/Panama-Canal.secret.md)

