---
title: Spermophilopsis leptodactylus
---

## *Spermophilopsis* 

# *Spermophilopsis leptodactylus*

## Long-clawed Ground Squirrel 


## Introduction

[Scott J. Steppan and Shawn M. Hamm]()

*Spermophilopsis leptodactylus* is the only species within the genus
*Spermophilopsis*. Known as the Long-clawed ground squirrel, *S.
leptodactylus* is a terrestrial squirrel, usually inhabiting sandy
deserts in regions of Central Asia such as Afghanistan and Iran. This
ground squirrel is social like most ground squirrel species, but tends
to have smaller sized family groups compared to prairie dog (*Cynomys*)
colonies. The small family unit will congregate in and around burrows
that are near or hidden by brush and foliage. The squirrel's diet ranges
from fruits and seeds to green vegetation and insects. It has been
observed to travel almost 1,000 meters in search of food when its food
sources have diminished (Novak 1999).

*S. leptodactylus* is active during the day, and therefore easily
observable by researchers. This species of squirrel does not hibernate
and mating occurs annually in February and March, with two to six
offspring being born around April or May (Krapp *in* Grzimek 1990; Novak
1999). The squirrel's name comes from the unusually long claws on its
forelimbs. No other squirrel has claws as long as *S. leptodactylus*. In
1996, the World Conservation Union put *S. leptodactylus* on their Red
List of Threatened Species (Baillie 1996).

### Characteristics

The Long-clawed Ground Squirrel is an average sized squirrel species,
with a head and body length of 200-280 mm and tail length approximately
70-90 mm. The color of their coat is separated, with the dorsal side a
yellow to grayish-yellow tint and the ventral, underside, white. There
are no stripes evident on this species. The coat is very short in the
summer and long and fuzzy in the winter. With this seasonal change in
coat, the squirrel is active throughout the year. The bottom of the tail
has a black tint and the top is fringed with yellow and white bristles.
The soles of the feet are heavily furred year round (Krapp *in* Grzimek
1990).

A unique characteristic of *S. leptodactylus* is the multiple pairs of
vibrissae on the underside of its body. Vibrissae are stiff hairs,
similar to whiskers on cats, that are very sensitive to surrounding
environments. The vibrissae on this squirrel may be helpful when it is
climbing through shrubs.

The defining features of this species are the long, thick claws. Growing
more than 10 mm long, these claws are very powerful and are used for
multiple purposes, including digging burrows (Novak 1999).\

### Systematics

Originally, this species was described as *Arctomys leptodactylus*
(Lichtenstein 1823). The genus *Spermophilopsis* was derived by Blasius
(1884), and placed in the tribe Xerini by Moore (1959). Gromov et al.
(1965) placed *S. leptodactylus* into the Subfamily Xerinae. Nadler and
Hoffman (1974) found *S. leptodactylus* to be genetically related to the
African xerine squirrels (Wilson and Reeder 2005). In 2004, Steppan et
al. concluded that there were three major lineages within the ground
squirrel clade known as the Xerine group. One major lineage, the Old
World Xerini, includes *S. leptodactylus,* and places the species among
the African *Xerus * and *Atlantoxerus* species (Steppan et al. 2004).

### Geographic Distribution

*S. leptodactylus* is the only species of the xerine squirrels found
outside of Africa. The squirrel is concentrated in Central Asia, from
the southeastern shore of the Caspian Sea to Lake Balkhash in
Kazakhstan.  This includes the countries Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and is
limited to the western parts of Tajikistan. The northwest region of
Afghanistan and northeast region of Iran create the southern most
boundary of the squirrel's distribution (Corbet 1978; Lay 1967; Wilson
and Reeder 2005).

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Xerini](../Xerini.md)
    -   [Xerinae](../../Xerinae.md)
    -   [Squirrel](../../../Squirrel.md)
    -   [Rodentia](Rodentia.md)
    -   [Eutheria](Eutheria.md)
    -   [Mammal](Mammal.md)
    -   [Therapsida](../../../../../../../Therapsida.md)
    -   [Synapsida](../../../../../../../../Synapsida.md)
    -   [Amniota](../../../../../../../../../Amniota.md)
    -   [Terrestrial Vertebrates](../../../../../../../../../../Terrestrial.md)
    -   [Sarc](../../../../../../../../../../../Sarc.md)(Sarc.md)
    -   [Gnathostomata](../../../../../../../../../../../../Gnath.md)
    -   [Vertebrata](../../../../../../../../../../../../../Vertebrata.md)
    -   [Craniata](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Craniata.md)
    -   [Chordata](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Chordata.md)
    -   [Deuterostomia](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Deutero.md)
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Xerini
    -   [Atlantoxerus getulus](Atlantoxerus_getulus)
    -   Spermophilopsis leptodactylus

-   » Sub-Groups 

