---
aliases:
- Kalashnikov
- "Avtomat Kalashnikova"
has_id_wikidata: Q37116
---

# [[AK-47]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[../../../../WikiData/WD~AK-47,37116]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> The **AK-47**, officially known as the Avtomat Kalashnikova (Russian: Автомат Калашникова, 
> lit. 'Kalashnikov's automatic [rifle]'; also known as the Kalashnikov or just AK), 
> is an assault rifle that is chambered for the 7.62×39mm cartridge. 
> 
> Developed in the Soviet Union by Russian small-arms designer Mikhail Kalashnikov, 
> it is the originating firearm of the Kalashnikov (or "AK") family of rifles. 
> After more than seven decades since its creation, the AK-47 model and its variants remain one of the most popular and widely used firearms in the world.
>
> Design work on the AK-47 began in 1945. It was presented for official military trials in 1947, and, in 1948, the fixed-stock version was introduced into active service for selected units of the Soviet Army. 
> In early 1949, the AK was officially accepted by the Soviet Armed Forces 
> and used by the majority of the member states of the Warsaw Pact.
>
> The model and its variants owe their global popularity to their reliability under harsh conditions, 
> low production cost (compared to contemporary weapons), 
> availability in virtually every geographic region, and ease of use. 
> 
> The AK has been manufactured in many countries and has seen service with armed forces 
> as well as irregular forces and insurgencies throughout the world. 
> 
> As of 2004, "of the estimated 500 million firearms worldwide, 
> approximately 100 million belong to the Kalashnikov family, three-quarters of which are AK-47s". 
> The model is the basis for the development of many other types of individual, 
> crew-served, and specialized firearms.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AK-47) 

