---
title: Pseudotsuga
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Pinaceae](Pinaceae.md)
    -   [Conifers](Conifers.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Pinaceae
    -   [Pinus](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Conifers/Pinaceae/Pinus.md)
    -   Pseudotsuga
    -   [Larix](Larix.md)

-   »

# Pseudotsuga [Carrière 1867]

## Douglas-fir 

[David S. Gernandt](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](PseudotsugaHidalgo_002.jpg)

Containing group: [Pinaceae](Pinaceae.md)

### Introduction

*Pseudotsuga* is a small genus of approximately five species distributed
in eastern Asia and western North America. *Pseudotsuga menziesii*, with
a distribution from western Canada to central Mexico, is one of the most
economically important timber species in the world.

### Characteristics

Medium to tall trees with straight stems and upright to spreading
branches. Spirally arranged leaves (needles), reddish brown
ovoid-conical vegetative buds. Reddish brown ovulate cones are pendulous
with exserted bracts (Farjon 1990).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Farjon (1990) recognized only four species of *Pseudotsuga*:
*Pseudotsuga macrocarpa* from southern California, *Pseudotsuga
menziesii* ranging from Canada to south-central Mexico, *Pseudotsuga
japonica* from southern Japan, and *Pseudotsuga sinensis* from China.
Included in the ToL phylogeny is also *P. wilsoniana* from Taiwan. In
addition to *P. wilsoniana*, several other species have been segregated
from *Pseudotsuga sinensis* (*P. forrestii*, *P. salvadorii*, *P.
gaussenii*, *P. brevifolia*, *P. xichangensis*), but these have not been
widely accepted. Mexican botanists tend to recognize four segregate
species of *Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca* in Mexico: *P.
macrolepis*, *P. rehderi*, *P. guinieri*, and *P. flahaultii* (Martínez
1963).

Relationships among the widely-accepted species were studied by Strauss
et al. 1990 using DNA restriction fragments and by Gernandt and Liston
(1999) using nuclear ribosomal DNA.

### References

Farjon, A. 1990. Pinaceae: drawings and descriptions of the genera
Abies, Cedrus, Pseudolarix, Keteleeria, Nothotsuga, Tsuga, Cathaya,
Pseudotsuga, Larix and Picea. Koeltz Scientific Books, Königstein.

Gernandt, D. S. and A. Liston. 1999. Internal transcribed spacer region
evolution in Larix and Pseudotsgua (Pinaceae). Amer. J. Bot. 86:711-723.

Martínez, M. 1963. Las Pináceas Mexicanas. 3rd edition. Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City.

Strauss, S. H., A. H. Doerksen, and J. R. Byrne. 1990. Evolutionary
relationships of Douglas-fir and its relatives (genus Pseudotsuga) from
DNA restriction fragment analysis. Canad. J. Bot. 68:1502-1510.

##### Title Illustrations

![](PseudotsugaHidalgo.jpg)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca
  Location ::           El Chico, Hidalgo
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © 2004 [David S. Gernandt](http://www.reduaeh.mx/investigacion/biologia/investigadores/gernandt_latteri.htm) 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------