---
title: Choanoflagellates
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Eukaryotes
    -   Choanoflagellates
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Fungi](Fungi)
    -   [Stramenopiles](Stramenopiles)
    -   [Alveolates](Alveolates)
    -   [Rhodophyta](Rhodophyta)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [The other protists](The_other_protists)

-   »

# Choanoflagellates

## Choanoflagellida, collared-flagellates 

[Stephen Fairclough and Nicole King](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](MonosigaTOL_002.jpg)
![ ](ProterospongiaTOL.jpg)

-   *Codosigidae*
-   *Salpingoecidae*
-   *Acanthoecidae*

Containing group: [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [Introduction to the     Choanoflagellata](http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/protista/choanos.html)
-   [Animation of     Choanoflagellates](http://www.biology.ualberta.ca/facilities/multimedia/uploads/zoology/choanoflagellate.html)
-   [OBIS Choanoflagellate     Database](http://www.iobis.org/OBISWEB/ObisControllerServlet?searchCategory=/SciNameServlet&category=PrCh&names=all&sciCount=40)
-   [Choanobase](http://mcb.berkeley.edu/labs/king/blast/)
-   [Protist Image     Database](http://www.bch.umontreal.ca/protists/gallery.html)

[](http://www.bch.umontreal.ca/protists/gallery.html)

[](http://www.bch.umontreal.ca/protists/gallery.html)

### Introduction

![ ](choanodiagram3.jpg)\

Choanoflagellate cell morphology. © [Stephen Fairclough](mailto:srfairclough@berkeley.edu)

Choanoflagellates are free-living, single-cell and colony forming
eukaryotes ubiquitous in aquatic environments. As their name implies,
choanoflagellates (collared flagellates) have a distinctive cell
morphology characterized by an ovoid or spherical cell body 3-10 µm in
diameter with a single apical flagellum surrounded by a collar of 30-40
microvilli (see figure). Movement of the flagellum creates water
currents that can propel free-swimming choanoflagellates through the
water column and trap bacteria and detritus against the collar of
microvilli where these foodstuffs are engulfed (see this animation from
the University of Alberta).
[](http://www.biology.ualberta.ca/facilities/multimedia/uploads/zoology/choanoflagellate.html)

Choanoflagellates are found globally in marine, brackish and freshwater
environments from the Arctic to the tropics, occupying both pelagic and
benthic zones. Although most sampling of choanoflagellates has occurred
between 0 m and 25 m, they have been recovered from as deep as 300 m in
open water (Thomsen, 1982) and 100 m under Antarctic ice sheets (Buck
and Garrison, 1988). Many species are hypothesized to be cosmopolitan on
a global scale \[e.g., *Diaphanoeca grandis* has been reported from
North America, Europe and Australia (OBIS)\], while other species are
reported to have restricted regional distributions (Thomsen, et al.,
1991). Co-distributed choanoflagellate species can occupy quite
different microenvironments, but in general, the factors that influence
the distribution and dispersion of choanoflagellates remain to be
elucidated. Irrespective of their distribution, choanoflagellates are in
high abundance relative to other nanoplankton members in their
communities, and there is a positive correlation between primary
producers and choanoflagellate densities, supporting a model in which
choanoflagellates play a pivotal role in the microbial food web and
carbon cycling (Buck and Garrison, 1988).

In addition to their critical ecological roles, choanoflagellates are of
particular interest to evolutionary biologists studying the origins of
multicellularity in animals. As one of the closest living relatives of
animals, choanoflagellates serve as a useful model for reconstructions
of the last unicellular ancestor of animals.

### Characteristics

In addition to the single apical flagellum surrounded by actin-filled
microvilli that characterizes choanoflagellates, the internal
organization of organelles in the cytoplasm is constant (Leadbeater and
Thomsen, 2000). A flagellar basal body sits at the base of the apical
flagellum, and a second, non-flagellar basal body rests at a right angle
to the flagellar base. The nucleus occupies an apical-to-central
position in the cell, and food vacuoles are positioned in the basal
region of the cytoplasm (Leadbeater and Thomsen, 2000; Karpov and
Leadbeater, 1998). Additionally, the cell body of many choanoflagellates
is surrounded by a distinguishing extracelluar matrix or periplast.
These cell coverings vary greatly in structure and composition and are
used by taxonomists for classification purposes. The functional
significance of the periplast is unknown, but in sessile organisms, it
is thought to aid in attachment to the substrate. In planktonic
organisms, there is speculation that the periplast increases drag,
thereby counteracting the force generated by the flagellum and
increasing feeding efficiency (Leadbeater and Kelly, 2001).

Choanoflagellates are either free-swimming in the water column or
sessile, adhering to the substrate directly or through either the
periplast or a thin pedicel (Leadbeater, 1983). Although
choanoflagellates are thought to be strictly free-living and
heterotrophic, a number of choanoflagellate relatives such as members of
Ichthyosporea or Mesomycetozoa follow a parasitic or pathogenic
lifestyle (Mendoza, 2002). The life histories of choanoflagellates are
poorly understood. Many species are thought to be solitary; however
coloniality seems to have arisen independently several times within the
group and colonial species retain a solitary stage (Leadbeater, 1983).

Choanoflagellates grow vegetatively, with many species undergoing
longitudinal fission (Karpov and Leadbeater, 1998); however, the
reproductive life cycle of choanoflagellates remains to be elucidated.
Currently, it is unclear whether there is a sexual phase to the
choanoflagellate life cycle. Interestingly, some choanoflagellates can
undergo encystment, which involves the retraction of the flagellum and
collar and encasement in an electron dense fibrillar wall. Upon transfer
to fresh media excystment occurs, though it remains to be directly
observed (Leadbeater and Karpov, 2000). Further examination of the
choanoflagellate life cycle will be informative about mechanisms of
colony formation and attributes present before the transition to
multicellularity.

### Classification

Members of the order Choanoflagellida are divided into three families
based upon the composition and structure of their periplast:
Codosigidae, Salpingoecidae and Acanthoecidae. Members of the family
Codosigidae appear to lack a periplast when examined by light
microscopy, but may have a fine outer coat visible only by electron
microscopy. The family Salpingoecidae consists of species whose cells
are encased in a firm theca that is visible by both light and electron
microscopy. The theca is a secreted covering predominately comprised of
cellulose or other polysaccharides (Adl, et al., 2005). The third family
of choanoflagellates, the Acanthoecidae, contains species whose cells
rest in a basket-like lorica composed of siliceous ribs or "costae"
(Leadbeater and Kelly, 2001; Leadbeater and Thomsen, 2000).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

The choanoflagellate families and their relationships to each other have
not been tested within a phylogenetic framework. The reconstruction of
the internal relationships of choanoflagellates is central to the goal
of polarizing character evolution within the clade. Resolution of the
internal relationships and character polarity within choanoflagellates
will be informative about the character states that are ancestral within
choanoflagellates and suggestive of the characteristics of the last
unicellular ancestor of animals.

### Relationship of Choanoflagellates to Metazoans

Dujardin, a French biologist interested in protozoan evolution, recorded
the morphological similarities of choanoflagellates and sponge
choanocytes and proposed the possibility of a close relationship as
early as 1841 (Leadbeater and Kelly, 2001). Over the past decade, this
hypothesized relationship between choanoflagellates and animals has been
upheld by independent analyses of multiple unlinked sequences: 18S rDNA,
nuclear protein-coding genes, and mitochondrial genomes (Steenkamp, et
al., 2006; Burger, et al., 2003; Mendoza, et al., 2002; Wainright, et
al., 1993). Importantly, comparisons of mitochondrial genome sequences
from a choanoflagellate and three sponges confirm the placement of
choanoflagellates as an outgroup to Metazoa and negate the possibility
that choanoflagellates evolved from metazoans (Lavrov, et al., 2005).
Finally, recent studies of genes expressed in choanoflagellates have
revealed that choanoflagellates synthesize homologues of metazoan cell
signaling and adhesion genes (King, 2003). Because choanoflagellates and
metazoans are closely related, comparisons between the two groups
promise to provide insights into the biology of their last common
ancestor and the earliest events in metazoan evolution.

### References

Adl, S., Simpson, A. G. B., Farmer, M. A., Adersen, R. A., Anderson, O.
R., Barta, J. R., Bowser, S. S., Brugerolle, G., Fensome, R. A.,
Fredericq, S., James, T. Y., Karpov, S., Kugrens, P., Krug, J., Lane, C.
E., Lewis, L. A., Lodge, J., Lynn, D. H., Mann, D. G., McCourt, R. M.,
Mendoza, L., Moestrup, Ø., Mozley-Standridge, S. E., Nerad, T. A.,
Shearer, C. A., Smirnov, A. V., Spiegel, F. W., and Taylor, M. F. J. R.
2005. The new higher level classification of eukaryotes with emphasis on
the taxonomy of protists. J. Eukaryot. Microbiol. 52:399--451.

Bell, G. (1988) Sex and Death in Protozoa: The History of an Obsession.
Cambridge : University Press.

Borchiellini, C. and Chombard, C. and Manuel, M. and Alivon, E. and
Vacelet, J. and Boury-Esnault, N. (2004) Molecular phylogeny of
Demospongiae: implications for classification and scenarios of character
evolution. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. , 32 pp. 823-37.

Buck, K. and Garrison, D. (1988) Distribution and abundance of
choanoflagellates (Acanthoecidae) across the ice-edge zone in the
Weddell Sea, Antarctica. Mar. Biol. , 98 pp. 263-269.

Burger, G. and Forget, L. and Zhu, Y. and Gray, M. and Lang, B. and
(2003) Unique mitochondrial genome architecture in unicellular relatives
of animals. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 100 pp. 892-897

Karpov, S. and Leadbeater, B. (1998) Cytoskeleton structure and
composition in choanoflagellates. J. Eukaryot. Microbiol., 45 pp.
361--367

King, N. (2005) Choanoflagellates. Curr. Biol., 15 pp. 113-114

King, N. (2004) The unicellular ancestry of animal development. Dev.
Cell., 7 pp.313-325

King, N. and Carroll, S. (2001) A receptor tyrosine kinase from
choanoflagellates: molecular insights into early animal evolution. P.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA., 98 pp. 15032-15037

King, N. and Christopher, H. and Carroll, S. (2003) Evolution of key
cell signaling and adhesion protein families predates animal origins.
Science, 301 pp. 361-363

Lavrov, D. and Forget, L. and Kelly, M. and Lang, B. (2005)
Mitochondrial genomes of two Demosponges provide insights into an early
stage of animal evolution. Mol. Biol. Evol., 22 pp. 1231-1239.

Leadbeater, B. (1983) Life-History and Ultrastrucutre of a New Marine
Species of Proterospongia (Choanoflagellida). J. Mar. Biol. Ass. U.K.,
63 pp. 135-160

Leadbeater, B. and Karpov, S. (2000) Cyst Formation in a Freshwater
Strain of the Choanoflagellate Desmarella moniliformis Kent. J.
Eukaryot. Microbiol., 47 pp. 433-439

Leadbeater, B. and Kelly, M. (2001) Evolution of animals
choanoflagellates and sponges. Water and Atmosphere Online. 9 pp. 9-11

Leadbeater, B. and Thomsen, H. (2000) Order choanoflagellida. In An
Illustrated Guide to the Protozoa, Second Edition. (pp. 14 -38 ).
Lawrence : Society of Protozoologists.

Mendoza, L. and Taylor, J. and Ajello, L. (2002) The class
mesomycetozoea: a heterogeneous group of microorganisms at the
animal-fungal boundary. Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 56 pp. 315-44.

Nerad, A. and Daggett, P. (1992) Cultivation of Choanoflagellates. In
Protocols In Protozoology. (pp. A-20.1-A-20.4). Lawerence : Society of
Protozoologists.

Ocean Biogeographic Information System. (2006). www.iobis.org

Patterson, D. (1996) Free-Living Freshwater Protozoa: A Colour Guide.
Washington, D.C. : ASM Press

Reid, P. and Turley, C. and Burkhill, P. (1988) Protozoa and Their Role
in Marine Processes. Berling Heidelberg : Springer-Verlag

Rokas, A. and King, N. and Finnerty, J, and Carroll, S. (2003)
Conflicting phylogenetic signals at the base of the metazoan tree. Evol.
& Dev., 5 pp. 346-359

Steenkamp, E. and Wright, J. and Baldauf, S. (2006) The Protistan
Origins of Animals and Fungi. Mol. Bio. Evol., 23 pp. 93-106.

Thomsen, H. and Buck, K. and Chavez, F. (1991) Choanoflagellates of the
central California waters: Taxonomy, morphology and species assemblages.
Ophelia, 33 pp. 131-164.

Thomsen, H. (1982) Planktonic choanoflagellates from Disko Bugt, West
Greenland, with a survey of the marine nanoplankton of the area.
Meddelelser om Gronland, Bioscience, 8 pp. 3-36

Wainright, P. and Hinkle, G. and Sogin, M. and Stickle, S. (1993)
Monophyletic origins of the metazoa: an evolutionary link with fungi.
Science, 260 pp. 340-342.

##### Title Illustrations

![](MonosigaTOL.jpg)

  ---------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Monosiga brevicollis
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [King Lab](mailto:srfairclough@berkeley.edu)
  ---------------------
![](ProterospongiaTOL_002.jpg)

  ---------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Proterospongia sp.
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Life Cycle Stage ::     Colony
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [King Lab](mailto:srfairclough@berkeley.edu)
  ---------------------