---
title: Sooglossidae
---

# [[Sooglossidae]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> **Sooglossidae**, the Seychelles frogs or Seychelles Island frogs, are a family of frogs found on the Seychelles Islands. Until recently, this family was believed to include the genera Sechellophryne, Nesomantis and Sooglossus, but following a major revision of amphibians in 2006, the genus Nesomantis was named a junior synonym of Sooglossus. Their closest relatives are the purple frogs (Nasikabatrachidae) of India.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sooglossidae) 
## Introduction

[David Cannatella]()

Sooglossids include two genera of small frogs that are restricted to the
Seychelles islands of the Indian Ocean (Silhouette and Mahé). The frogs
are relatively small and terrestrial. Their phylogenetic placement is
the subject of much controversy; see below. They are unusual as
neobatrachians in having inguinal amplexus. There are no fossils.

### Geographic Distribution

The distribution of living members of the family Sooglossidae is
confined to the Seychelles Islands, as indicated in red.\

![ ](Sooglossidae/sooglossidae.gif)

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Ford and Cannatella (1993) defined Sooglossidae as a node-based name for
the common ancestor of Nesomantis and Sooglossus, and all its
descendants. The only published synapomorphy appears to be the presence
of a sesamoid bone in the heel region (os sesamoides tarsale; Nussbaum,
1982), a feature shared with some petropedetine ranids. Sooglossids have
been allied to ranoids (Griffiths, 1959a, 1963; Tyler, 1985) or to
myobatrachids (Lynch, 1973). Duellman (1975) placed the sooglossids with
ranoids on the basis of zoogeography. The two derived characters cited
as evidence of a ranoid relationship (Griffiths, 1959a) are the
semitendinosus tendon passing dorsal to the m. gracilis and partial
fusion of the epicoracoid cartilages and sternum of the pectoral girdle.
Nussbaum (1980) concluded that placement of Sooglossidae in Ranoidea was
not supported, and preferred its placement near myobatrachids. Hay et
al. (1995) placed Sooglossus in a trichotomy with 1) ranoids and 2) a
clade composed of all other neobatrachians.

Ford and Cannatella (1993) described five shared derived characters
allying sooglossids to myobatrachines. The first is a ventrally
incomplete cricoid ring (Lynch, 1973); the ring is complete in
Rheobatrachus and limnodynastines (Heyer and Liem, 1976). The second is
the semitendinosus tendon inserting dorsal to the m. gracilis. This is
shared with all myobatrachines except for Taudactylus, which has a
ventral insertion (plesiomorphic); the insertion is also ventral in
Rheobatrachus (Heyer and Liem, 1976). A third shared derived character
is the horizontal pupil, which sooglossids share with myobatrachines,
except for Uperoleia (also vertical in Rheobatrachus). Limnodynastines
primitively have a vertical pupil, but several genera have horizontal
ones (Heyer and Liem, 1976). A fourth derived character shared with
myobatrachines and Rheobatrachus is the winglike alary processes of the
hyoid (Griffiths, 1959a). The fifth is a divided sphenethmoid, which is
present in sooglossids (Griffiths, 1959a) and myobatrachines but not
limnodynastines (Lynch, 1971). Ford and Cannatella (1993) concluded that
Sooglossidae is the sister taxon of Myobatrachinae (Table 1), and they
treated the two as an unnamed more inclusive taxon.

A character of uncertain status is the presence of notochordal vertebrae
(Lynch, 1973; but Noble \[1926\] reported procoelous vertebrae),
reported in myobatrachines and sooglossids, but not limnodynastines. The
polarity is uncertain because 1) other presumably closely related taxa
have not been characterized adequately, and 2) observations on dried
specimens differ from those made from serial sections (Cannatella,
personal observation). Sooglossids and myobatrachines share the
plesiomorphic condition of inguinal amplexus. According to Heyer and
Liem (1976), Mixophys is the only myobatrachid genus with axillary
amplexus, but Lynch (1973) incorrectly reported that myobatrachines have
inguinal amplexus and limnodynastines have axillary amplexus.

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Neobatrachia](../Neobatrachia.md)
    -   [Salientia](../../Salientia.md)
    -   [Living Amphibians](Living_Amphibians)
    -   [Terrestrial Vertebrates](../../../../Terrestrial.md)
    -   [Sarcopterygii](../../../../../Sarc.md)
    -   [Gnathostomata](../../../../../../Gnath.md)
    -   [Vertebrata](../../../../../../../Vertebrata.md)
    -   [Craniata](../../../../../../../../Craniata.md)
    -   [Chordata](../../../../../../../../../Chordata.md)
    -   [Deuterostomia](../../../../../../../../../../Deutero.md)
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Neobatrachia
    -   [Allophryne ruthveni](Allophryne_ruthveni.md)
    -   [Brachycephalidae](Brachycephalidae.md)
    -   [Bufonidae](Bufonidae.md)
    -   [Heleophryne](Heleophryne.md)
    -   [\'Leptodactylidae\'](%27Leptodactylidae%27)
    -   [Limnodynastinae](Limnodynastinae.md)
    -   [Myobatrachinae](Myobatrachinae.md)
    -   Sooglossidae
    -   [Rhinoderma](Rhinoderma.md)
    -   [Dendrobatidae](Dendrobatidae.md)
    -   [Pseudidae](Pseudidae.md)
    -   [Hylidae](Hylidae.md)
    -   [Centrolenidae](Centrolenidae.md)
    -   [Microhylidae](Microhylidae.md)
    -   [Hemisus](Hemisus.md)
    -   [Arthroleptidae](Arthroleptidae.md)
    -   [\'Ranidae\'](%27Ranidae%27)
    -   [Hyperoliidae](Hyperoliidae.md)
    -   [Rhacophoridae](Rhacophoridae.md)

-   » Sub-Groups 
	-   *Sooglossus gardineri*
	-   *Sooglossus sechellensis*
	-   *Nesomantis thomasseti*


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Sooglossidae.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Sooglossidae.secret.md)

