---
title: Scyphostegia borneensis
---

## Phylogeny 


-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Malpighiales](../Malpighiales.md)
    -   [Rosids](../../Rosids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [Eudicots](../../../../Eudicots.md)
    -   [Flowering_Plant](../../../../../Flowering_Plant.md)
    -   [Seed_Plant](../../../../../../Seed_Plant.md)
    -   [Land_Plant](../../../../../../../Land_Plant.md)
    -   [Green plants](../../../../../../../../Plants.md)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Malpighiales
    -   [Salicaceae](Salicaceae)
    -   Scyphostegia borneensis
    -   [Lacistemataceae](Lacistemataceae.md)
    -   [Samydaceae](Samydaceae.md)

-   » Sub-Groups 

# *Scyphostegia borneensis* 

[Mac H. Alford](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![ ](Scyphostegia_borneensis/Scyphostegia_ToL1.jpg)

Containing group: [Malpighiales](../Malpighiales.md)

### Introduction

*Scyphostegia borneensis* is an enigmatic species endemic to the
northern part of Borneo. Its unusual combination of dioecy, basal
placentation, 3-merous flowers, and telescoping inflorescence bracts
have puzzled botanists, and the species has been placed by different
authors in several different and distantly-related families, including
Monimiaceae, Moraceae, Tamaricaceae, and Flacourtiaceae. Most workers
after the early 1900s placed it in its own monotypic family, the
Scyphostegiaceae. Analyses of plastid DNA sequences have clearly
demonstrated that *Scyphostegia borneensis* belongs in Malpighiales and
is a close relative of Salicaceae. Like many Malpighiales, its leaves
are toothed and stipulate and its seeds are arillate. Like Salicaceae,
the anther dehiscence is extrorse, and some authors (e.g., Chase et al.,
2002) place it in a broader Salicaceae. Because it differs from other
Salicaceae in its telescoping bracts, connate and tubular perianth,
connate stamens, basal placentation, and arillate seeds, it is probably
best to continue to place *Scyphostegia borneensis* in its own family,
the Scyphostegiaceae.

### Characteristics

*Shrubs* or *small trees*. *Leaves* simple, alternate, toothed,
stipulate. *Dioecious*. *Inflorescences* terminal, consisting of
racemosely-arranged spikes or racemes, each spike or raceme a series of
flowers within telescoped tubular bracts, the lower bracts subtending a
single flower, the terminal bract subtending two. *Perianth* connate,
tubular, with 6 lobes, 3 in an outer whorl (calyx) and 3 in an inner
whorl (corolla), the whorls more or less equal in female flowers but the
inner whorl conspicuously shorter in male flowers. *Male flowers* with 3
extrastaminal disk glands and with 3 connate stamens, opposite the
petals, anther dehiscence longitudinal and extrorse. *Female flowers*
lacking disk glands, with a gynoecium consisting of a superior,
unilocular, urceolate ovary (appearing somewhat fig-like) with basal
placentation and numerous erect, anatropous ovules; style and stigma not
evident, perhaps depressed into the center. *Fruits* fleshy capsules
deshicent from the apex, reminiscent of Monimiaceae. *Seeds* numerous,
arillate; embryos straight, cotyledons foliaceous.

### References

Chase, M. W., S. Zmarzty, M. D. Lledó, K. J. Wurdack, S. M. Swensen, and
M. F. Fay. 2002. When in doubt, put it in Flacourtiaceae: a molecular
phylogenetic analysis based on plastid rbcL DNA sequences. Kew Bulletin
57: 141-181.

Swamy, B. G. L. 1953. On the floral structure of Scyphostegia.
Proceedings of the National Institute of Science of India. Part B:
Biological Science 19: 127-142.

van Heel, W. A. 1967. Anatomical and ontogenetic investigations on the
morphology of the flowers and the fruit of Scyphostegia borneensis Stapf
(Scyphostegiaceae). Blumea 15: 107-125.

van Steenis, C. G. G. J. 1957. Scyphostegiaceae. Pp. 297-299 in Vol. 5,
Flora Malesiana, Series 1.

##### Title Illustrations

![](Scyphostegia_ToL1_002.jpg)

  --------------
  Scientific Name ::     Scyphostegia borneensis
  Location ::           Malaysia: Sabah: Mt. Kinabalu
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        Read S. Beaman
  Sex ::                Male
  Copyright ::            © 2004 Read S. Beaman
  --------------