---
title: Gerrardina
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Rosids](Rosids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Rosids
    -   Gerrardina
    -   [Fagales](Fagales.md)
    -   [Cucurbitales](Cucurbitales.md)
    -   [Rosales](Rosales.md)
    -   [Fabales](Fabales.md)
    -   [Zygophyllales](Zygophyllales.md)
    -   [Oxalidales](Oxalidales.md)
    -   [Malpighiales](Malpighiales.md)
    -   [Celastrales](Celastrales.md)
    -   [Geraniales](Geraniales.md)
    -   [Crossosomatales](Crossosomatales.md)
    -   [Myrtales](Myrtales.md)
    -   [Brassicales](Brassicales.md)
    -   [Malvales](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots/Rosids/Malvales.md)
    -   [Sapindales](Sapindales.md)

-   »

## Gerrardinaceae 

# *Gerrardina* 

[Mac H. Alford](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](gerrardina_tol1_002.jpg)
![ ](gerrardina_tol2.jpg)

Containing group: [Rosids](Rosids.md)

### Introduction

*Gerrardina* is a genus of two species native to southern and eastern
Africa. Traditionally, the genus has been placed in the polyphyletic
family Flacourtiaceae due to its gross similarities with tribe
Homalieae, which have alternate, simple, toothed leaves, receptacular
disk glands, and stamens opposite petals. However, *Gerrardina* differs
from tribe Homalieae, now placed in Salicaceae, by having apical
placentation, small embryos, different leaf teeth, and a mucilaginous
foliar epidermis. Analyses of plastid DNA data indicate that
*Gerrardina* is related to Brassicales, Huerteales, Malvales, and
Sapindales, but further placement has not been possible given the data
presently available.

### Characteristics

*Shrubs* or *small trees*, sometimes scandent. *Leaves* simple,
alternate, stipulate; venation pinnate; margins serrate.
*Inflorescences* axillary, in few-flowered raceme-like cymes. *Flowers*
hermaphroditic, actinomorphic, perigynous. *Calyx* lobes 5, persistent,
aestivation imbricate. *Corolla* lobes 5, caducous. *Stamens* 5,
opposite petals; anther dehiscence longitudinal, introrse. *Disk*
present, cupular, adnate to the hypanthium. *Gynoecium* of 2 carpels
united to form a compound, superior ovary (though recessed in the
receptacle) topped by a single style with a subcapitate or minutely
bifid stigma; ovary unilocular; ovules 4, anatropous, borne on 2
placentae, pendulous from near the apex. *Fruits* pendulous, dry or
fleshy berries with 1-4 seeds. *Seeds* exarillate; embryo minute, erect.

### References

Alford, M. H. 2006. Gerrardinaceae: a new family of African flowering
plants unresolved among Brassicales, Huerteales, Malvales, and
Sapindales. Taxon 55: 959-964.

Killick, D. J. B. 1976. Flacourtiaceae. Pp. 53-92 in J. H. Ross, ed.
Flora of South Africa. Vol. 22. Botanical Research Institute, Pretoria.

Milne-Redhead, E. 1939. Gerrardina eylesiana Milne-Redhead. Hooker\'s
Icon. Pl., Fifth Series 4: 1-2, t. 3390.

Oliver, D. 1870. Gerrardina foliosa, Oliv. Hooker\'s Icon. Pl., Third
Series 1: 60. t. 1075.

Sleumer, H. O. 1975. Flacourtiaceae. In R. M. Polhill, ed. Flora of
Tropical East Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and
Administrations, London.

##### Title Illustrations

![](gerrardina_tol1.jpg)

  -------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Gerrardina foliosa
  Location ::           South Africa: Eastern Cape Province: Lupatana
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        Tony Dold
  Body Part            Flower
  Collection           USMS, GRA
  Collector            T. Dold
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [Tony Dold](http://www.ru.ac.za/botany)
  -------------------
![](gerrardina_tol2_002.jpg)

  -------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Gerrardina foliosa
  Location ::           South Africa: Eastern Cape Province: Lupatana
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        Tony Dold
  Collection           USMS, GRA
  Collector            T. Dold
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [Tony Dold](http://www.ru.ac.za/botany)
  -------------------