---
title: Malvales
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Rosids](Rosids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Rosids
    -   [Gerrardina](Gerrardina)
    -   [Fagales](Fagales.md)
    -   [Cucurbitales](Cucurbitales.md)
    -   [Rosales](Rosales.md)
    -   [Fabales](Fabales.md)
    -   [Zygophyllales](Zygophyllales.md)
    -   [Oxalidales](Oxalidales.md)
    -   [Malpighiales](Malpighiales.md)
    -   [Celastrales](Celastrales.md)
    -   [Geraniales](Geraniales.md)
    -   [Crossosomatales](Crossosomatales.md)
    -   [Myrtales](Myrtales.md)
    -   [Brassicales](Brassicales.md)
    -   Malvales
    -   [Sapindales](Sapindales.md)

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Core Malvales](Core_Malvales)

# Malvales 

[Stacey D. Smith and David A. Baum](#AboutThisPage)

![Rock rose, Cistus](Cistus0069_002.jpg)
![](Adansonia_digitata0133_002.jpg)
![](Malva_sylvestris0025.jpg)

Phylogeny of expanded Malvales based on Bayer et al. (1999) and Alverson
et al. (1998). Core Malvales includes the taxa traditionally placed in
the Bombacaceae, Malvaceae, Sterculiaceae and Tiliaceae.

Containing group: [Rosids](Rosids.md)

### Information on the Internet

[Malvaceae Info](http://www.malvaceae.info/)

### Introduction

The order Malvales has traditionally included four core families,
Bombacaceae, Malvaceae, Sterculiaceae and Tiliaceae, although various
authors have included other families such as Cistaceae and
Cochlospermaceae. Recent phylogenetic studies (e.g., Alverson et al.
1998, Bayer et al. 1999) have revealed that the four core families form
a monophyletic group, termed here the core Malvales, and have identified
ten allied families which are included in the expanded Malvales shown in
the tree above. Together, these families contain approximately 4,000
species and range from small Mediterranean shrubs like *Cistus* to
towering tropical trees like *Shorea*. The order also contains many
economically important plants, such as *Cola* (the source of cola
flavor), *Bixa orellana* (annatto, a natural red coloring), *Theobroma
cacao* (the source of cocoa) and *Gossypium* (cotton) and *Ochroma
pyramidale* (balsa wood).

### Characteristics

Many members of Malvales can be identified by the following combination
of characters: leaves with palmate venation (often three principal veins
arising from the base of the leaf blade), mucilage canals within the
tissues (think of the slime in Okra), stellate (star-shaped) hairs on
the vegetative parts of the plant and stipules (leaf-like structures at
the base of the leaf stalk).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

The core Malvales clade has been consistently well-supported in
molecular phylogenetic analyses as have the clades comprising
Bixaceae+Diegodendraceae+Cochlospermaceae and
Dipterocarpaceae+Sarcolaenaceae+Cistaceae. However, placement of the
remaining families (Muntingiaceae, Sphaerosepalaceae, Thymelaceae and
Neuradaceae) is still unclear. Muntingiaceae falls either in the
Dipterocarpaceae+Sarcolaenaceae+Cistaceae clade (Alverson et al. 1998,
Fay et al. 1998) or at the base of the Malvales (Bayer et al. 1999).
Analyses by Alverson et al. (1998) place Sphaerosepalaceae basal in the
Bixaceae+Cochlospermaceae clade (Diegodendraceae was not sampled in
their analysis). In contrast, Bayer et al. (1999) found that
Sphaerosepalaceae falls sister to Thymelaeaceae, but with weak support.
Thymelaeaceae (+Sphaerosepalaceae) has been weakly supported as sister
to the Dipterocarpaceae+Sarcolaenaceae+Cistaceace+Muntingiaceae
(Alverson et al. 1998, Bayer et al. 1999). Finally, Neuradaceae seems
most likely to belong at the base of the Malvales, although no studies
have been able to place it with certainty.

### References

Alverson, W. S., K. G. Karol, D. A. Baum, M. W. Chase, S. M. Swensen, R.
McCourt, and K. J. Sytsma. 1998. Circumscription of the Malvales and
relationships to other Rosidae: Evidence from rbcL sequence data.
American Journal of Botany 85:876-887.

Bayer, C., M. F. Fay, A. Y. De Bruijn, V. Savolainen, C. M. Morton, K.
Kubitzki, W. S. Alverson, and M. W. Chase. 1999. Support for an expanded
family concept of Malvaceae with a recircumscribed order Malvales: a
combined analysis of plastid atpB and rbcL DNA sequences. Botanical
Journal of the Linnean Society 129:267-303.

Fay, M. F., C. Bayer, W. S. Alverson, A. Y. de Bruijn, and M. W. Chase.
1998. Plastid rbcL sequence data indicate a close affinity between
Diegodendron and Bixa. Taxon 47:43-50.

##### Title Illustrations

![Rock rose, Cistus](Cistus0069.jpg)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Cistus
  Location ::           Golden Gate Park, Strybing Arboretum (San Francisco County, California, USA)
  Comments             Rock rose (Cistaceae)
  Creator              Photograph by G. Dallas and Margaret Hanna
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Source Collection    [CalPhotos](http://calphotos.berkeley.edu/)
  Copyright ::            © 1999 [California Academy of Sciences](http://www.calacademy.org/) 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
![Baobab tree, Adansonia digitata](Adansonia_digitata0133.jpg)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Adansonia digitata
  Location ::           East Africa
  Comments             Baobab tree (Core Malvales).
  Creator              Photograph by Robert Thomas and Margaret Orr
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Source Collection    [CalPhotos](http://calphotos.berkeley.edu/)
  Copyright ::            © 1999 [California Academy of Sciences](http://www.calacademy.org/) 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
![High mallow, Malva sylvestris](Malva_sylvestris0025_002.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Malva sylvestris (Core Malvales)
  Location ::           Bodega Bay (Sonoma County, California, USA)
  Comments             High mallow
  Creator              Photograph by Brother Alfred Brousseau
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Source Collection    [CalPhotos](http://calphotos.berkeley.edu/)
  Copyright ::            © 1995 [Saint Mary\'s College of California](mailto:rpolowin@stmarys-ca.edu) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------