---
title: Detarieae sensu lato
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Fabaceae](Fabaceae.md)
    -   [Fabales](Fabales.md)
    -   [Rosids](Rosids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Fabaceae
    -   [Cercideae](Cercideae.md)
    -   Detarieae sensu lato
    -   [Cassieae sensu lato (pro         parte)](Cassieae_%28pro_parte%29)
    -   [Caesalpinieae s.l. & s.s., Cassieae sensu stricto,         Mimosoideae](Caesalpinieae_s.l._%26_s.s.%2C_Cassieae_sensu_stricto%2C_Mimosoideae)
    -   [Papilionoideae](Papilionoideae.md)

-   »

# Detarieae sensu lato 

[Martin F. Wojciechowski and Johanna Mahn](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](FABA-brow-ma-ecu-77521_002.jpg)
![ ](561.jpg)
![](FABA-crud-gl-ecu-7626.jpg)
![ ](65.jpg)

Containing group: [Fabaceae](Fabaceae.md)

### Introduction

The Detarieae sens. lat. is pantropical in distribution and consists of
82 genera and c. 750 species, with the majority of genera confined to
Africa and Madagascar (Mackinder, 2005). This group is known for its
remarkable range and complex patterns of floral modifications.

Of special interest, the [World Conservation Union](http://iucn.org/)
has assessed at least 132 extant species of Detarieae for red data
status, 13 of which are considered endangered, 11 are critically
endangered, and 73 are near endangered or vulnerable (Mackinder, 2005).

### Characteristics

Species in Detarieae demonstrate co-adaptation with animals for
defensive and reproductive purposes. They have adapted flower shape and
coloration to attract bees for pollination, and some have leaves that
attract ants. Other distinguishing characteristics include the
production of tannins and terpenoids (Cowan and Polhill, 1981).
Detarieae sens. lat. also includes a number of resin-producing genera
(Fougere-Danezan et al., 2003).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Detarieae sens. lat. (sensu Polhill, 1994) includes the tribes Detarieae
DC. and Amherstieae Bentham. The range and complexity of morphological
variation, especially floral modifications, exhibited in the tribe have
proven problematic to the establishment of clearly circumscribed and
accepted generic groupings (Mackinder, 2005). Phylogenies based on
morphological characteristics and molecular genetic studies exist, but
extreme diversity among species makes determining relationships between
them difficult. The African species are the primary focus of study
within the tribe, other species and their classification are less well
known.

The first \'comprehensive\' studies of phylogenetic relationships, based
on molecular sequence data, were those of Bruneau et al. (2000, 2001)
which suggested that none of the proposed generic groups (e.g., Cowan
and Polhill, 1981; Polhill, 1994) were strongly supported as
monophyletic. More recent analyses of molecular data alone and combined
molecular and morphological data (Herendeen et al., 2003; Wieringa and
Gervais, 2003) have provided additional resolution and support for some
groups. For example, the \'Prioria\' (sensu Bruneau et al., 2001),
Detarieae sens. strict., and \'Amherstieae\' subclades are
well-supported but unresolved with respect to each other. The
Amherstieae clade contains the \'Brownea\' and Macrolobieae subclades
(sensu Bruneau et al., 2001), with the latter containing a number of
familiar genera such as *Berlinia, Aphanocalyx, Bikinia*, and
*Tetraberlinia*. *Tamarindus*, the tamarind-producing plant, is also
included in Amherstieae.

### References

Bruneau, A., F. J. Breteler, J. J. Weiringa, G. Y. F. Gervais, and F.
Forest. 2000. Phylogenetic relationships in tribes Macrolobieae and
Detarieae as inferred from chloroplast *trnL* intron sequences. Pages
121-149 in Advances in Legume Systematics, part 9 (P.S. Herendeen and A.
Bruneau, eds.). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK.

Bruneau, A., F. Forest, P. S. Herendeen, B. B. Klitgaard, and G. P.
Lewis. 2001. Phylogenetic relationships in the Caesalpinioideae
(Leguminosae) as inferred from chloroplast *trnL* intron sequences.
Systematic Botany 26: 487-514.

Cowan, R. S. and R. M. Polhill. 1981. Detarieae. Pages 117-134 in
Advances in Legume Systematics, part 1 (R. M Polhill and P. H. Raven,
eds.). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK.

Fougere-Danezan, M., S. Maumont, and A. Bruneau. 2003. Phylogenetic
relationships in the resin-producing Detarieae inferred from molecular
data and preliminary results from a biogeographic hypothesis. Pages
161-180 in Advances in Legume Systematics, part 10, higher level
systematics (B.B. Klitgaard and A. Bruneau, eds.). Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, UK.

Herendeen, P. S., A. Bruneau, G. P. Lewis. 2003. Phylogenetic
relationships in caesalpinioid legumes: a preliminary analysis based on
morphological and molecular data. Pages 37-62 in Advances in Legume
Systematics, part 10, higher level systematics (B. B. Klitgaard and A.
Bruneau, eds.). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK.

Mackinder, B. 2005. Detarieae. Pages 69-109 Legumes of the world (Lewis,
G., B. Schrire, B. MacKinder, and M. Lock, eds.). The Royal Botanical
Gardens, Kew, UK.

Polhill, R. M. 1994. Classification of the Leguminosae. Pages
xxxv-xlviii in Phytochemical Dictionary of the Leguminosae (F. A. Bisby,
J. Buckingham, and J. B. Harborne, eds.). Chapman and Hall, New York,
NY.

Wieringa, J. J., and G. Y. F. Gervais. 2003. Phylogenetic analysis of
combined morphological and molecular data sets on the
Aphanocalyx-Bikinia-Tetraberlinia group (Leguminosae, Caesalpinioideae,
Detarieae s.l.). Pages 181-196 in Advances in Legume Systematics, part
10, higher level systematics (B. B. Klitgaard and A. Bruneau, eds.).
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK.

##### Title Illustrations

![](FABA-brow-ma-ecu-77521.jpg)

  --------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Brownea macrophylla L.
  Location ::           Ecuador
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © [Robin Foster](http://fm2.fieldmuseum.org/plantguides/default.asp)
  --------------------------
![](561_002.jpg)

  --------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Tamarindus indica L.
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [Mark Hyde and Bart Wursten](http://www.zimbabweflora.co.zw/)
  --------------------------
![](FABA-crud-gl-ecu-7626_002.jpg)

  -----------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Crudia glaberrima Macbride
  Location ::           Ecuador
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © [Robin Foster](http://fm2.fieldmuseum.org/plantguides/)
  -----------------------
![](65_002.jpg)

  --------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Berlinia bruneelii (De Wild.) Torr. & Hillc.
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © 2005 [Paul Latham](http://home.tiscali.be/lpauwels/Latham2.htm)
  --------------------------