---
aliases:
  - CNC
  - Computer numerical control
  - CNC machining
  - CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control)
  - CNC(Computer Numerical Control)
has_id_wikidata: Q190247
subclass_of:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~controller,1321995]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~production_process,1408286]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~digital_control,2720568]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~numerical_control,3689317]]"
used_by: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~CNC_machine,13231055]]"
subreddit: CNC
Commons_gallery: CNC
Commons_category: Computer numerical control
---

# [[CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control)]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[../../../WikiData/WD~Computer_numerical_control,190247|WD~Computer_numerical_control,190247]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> Computer numerical control (CNC) or CNC machining 
> is the automated control of machine tools by a computer. 
> 
> It is an evolution of numerical control (NC),  
> where machine tools are directly managed by data storage media such as punched cards or punched tape. A very early example of this is the [[Jacquard_Machine]]. 
> 
> 
> Because CNC allows for easier programming, modification, and real-time adjustments, 
> it has gradually replaced NC as computing costs declined.
>
> A CNC machine is a motorized maneuverable tool and often a motorized maneuverable platform, 
> which are both controlled by a computer, according to specific input instructions. 
> Instructions are delivered to a CNC machine in the form of 
> a sequential program of machine control instructions such as G-code and M-code, and then executed. 
> 
> The program can be written by a person or, far more often, 
> generated by graphical computer-aided design (CAD) 
> or computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) software. 
> In the case of 3D printers, the part to be printed is "sliced" 
> before the instructions (or the program) are generated. 3D printers also use G-Code.
>
> CNC offers greatly increased productivity over non-computerized machining for repetitive production, 
> where the machine must be manually controlled (e.g. using devices such as hand wheels or levers) 
> or mechanically controlled by pre-fabricated pattern guides (see pantograph mill). 
> 
> However, these advantages come at significant 
> cost in terms of both capital expenditure and job setup time. 
> For some prototyping and small batch jobs, 
> a good machine operator can have parts finished to a high standard 
> whilst a CNC workflow is still in setup.
>
> In modern CNC systems, the design of a mechanical part 
> and its manufacturing program are highly automated. 
> 
> The part's mechanical dimensions are defined using CAD software 
> and then translated into manufacturing directives by CAM software. 
> The resulting directives are transformed (by "post processor" software) 
> into the specific commands necessary for a particular machine to produce the component 
> and then are loaded into the CNC machine.
>
> Since any particular component might require the use of 
> several different tools – drills, saws,  touch probes etc. – 
> modern machines often combine multiple tools into a single "cell". 
> 
> In other installations, several different machines are used with an external controller 
> and human or robotic operators that move the component from machine to machine. 
> 
> In either case, the series of steps needed to produce any part is highly automated 
> and produces a part that meets every specification in the original CAD drawing, 
> where each specification includes a tolerance.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer%20numerical%20control) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control)](/_Standards/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).public](/_public/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).internal](/_internal/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).protect](/_protect/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).private](/_private/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).personal](/_personal/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).secret](/_secret/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/CNC(Computer_Numerical_Control).secret.md)

