---
has_id_wikidata: Q338047
dv_has_:
  name_:
    ar: قواعد خالية من السياق
    bn: প্রসঙ্গমুক্ত ব্যাকরণ
    ca: gramàtica lliure de context
    cs: bezkontextová gramatika
    de: kontextfreie Grammatik
    en: context-free grammar
    eo: senkunteksta gramatiko
    es: gramática libre de contexto
    fa: گرامر مستقل از متن
    fi: Yhteydetön kielioppi
    fr: grammaire non contextuelle
    gl: Gramática libre de contexto
    he: דקדוק חופשי-הקשר
    hr: Kontekstno neovisna gramatika
    hu: környezetfüggetlen nyelvtan
    it: grammatica libera dal contesto
    ja: 文脈自由文法
    ko: 문맥 자유 문법
    mk: Контексно слободна граматика
    ml: കോൺടെക്സ്റ്റ് ഫ്രീ വ്യാകരണം
    mwl: Gramática libre de cuntesto
    nb: kontekstfri grammatikk
    nl: contextvrije grammatica
    pl: gramatyka bezkontekstowa
    pt: gramática livre de contexto
    ru: контекстно-свободная грамматика
    sh: Kontekstno neovisna gramatika
    sk: bezkontextová gramatika
    sl: kontekstno neodvisna slovnica
    sr: Контекстно слободна граматика
    sr_ec: Контекстно слободна граматика
    sr_el: Kontekstno slobodna gramatika
    sv: kontextfri grammatik
    ta: இடம் சாரா இலக்கணம்
    uk: контекстно-вільна граматика
    zh: 上下文无关文法
    zh_cn: 上下文无关文法
    zh_hans: 上下文无关文法
    zh_hant: 上下文無關文法
    zh_hk: 上下文無關文法
    zh_sg: 上下文无关文法
    zh_tw: 上下文無關文法
aliases:
- bezkontextová gramatika
- context-free grammar
- contextvrije grammatica
- gramatyka bezkontekstowa
- grammaire non contextuelle
- grammatica libera dal contesto
- gramàtica lliure de context
- gramática libre de contexto
- Gramática libre de cuntesto
- gramática livre de contexto
- kontekstfri grammatikk
- kontekstno neodvisna slovnica
- Kontekstno neovisna gramatika
- Kontekstno slobodna gramatika
- kontextfreie Grammatik
- kontextfri grammatik
- környezetfüggetlen nyelvtan
- senkunteksta gramatiko
- Yhteydetön kielioppi
- Контексно слободна граматика
- Контекстно слободна граматика
- контекстно-вільна граматика
- контекстно-свободная грамматика
- דקדוק חופשי-הקשר
- قواعد خالية من السياق
- گرامر مستقل از متن
- প্রসঙ্গমুক্ত ব্যাকরণ
- இடம் சாரா இலக்கணம்
- കോൺടെക്സ്റ്റ് ഫ്രീ വ്യാകരണം
- 上下文无关文法
- 上下文無關文法
- 文脈自由文法
- 문맥 자유 문법
---

# [[Context-free_grammar]]  

> In formal language theory, a **Context-free grammar** (CFG) is a formal grammar whose production rules 
>
> can be applied to a nonterminal symbol regardless of its context.
>
> In particular, in a context-free grammar, each production rule is of the form
>         A → α
>   with 
>         A    a single nonterminal symbol, and 
>         α    a string of terminals and/or nonterminals (α can be empty). 
>  Regardless of which symbols surround it, the single nonterminal 
>         A
>    on the left hand side can always be replaced by 
>         α
>    on the right hand side. 
>    
>    This  distinguishes it from a context-sensitive grammar, 
>    which can have production rules in the form 
>         αAβ → αγβ
>    with 
>         A    a nonterminal symbol and 
>         α,β, and γ
>    strings of terminal and/or nonterminal symbols.
>
> A formal grammar is essentially a set of production rules 
> that describe all strings allowed in a given formal language. 
> 
> Production rules are simple replacements. 
> For example, the first rule in the picture,
>         ⟨Stmt⟩ → ⟨Id⟩ = ⟨Expr⟩;
>   replaces `⟨Stmt⟩` with `⟨Id⟩ = ⟨Expr⟩;`.
>   There can be multiple replacement rules for a given nonterminal symbol. 
>   The language generated by a grammar is the set of all strings of terminal symbols 
>   that can be derived, by repeated rule applications, 
>   from some particular nonterminal symbol ("start symbol").
>
> Nonterminal symbols are used during the derivation process, 
> but do not appear in its final result string.
>
> Languages generated by context-free grammars 
> are known as [[Context-free_language]] (CFL). 
> 
> Different context-free grammars can generate the same context-free language. 
> 
> It is important to distinguish the properties of the language (intrinsic properties) 
> from the properties of a particular grammar (extrinsic properties). 
> 
> The language equality question is undecidable:
> Do two given context-free grammars generate the same language?
>
> Context-free grammars arise in linguistics 
> where they are used to describe the structure of sentences and words in a natural language, 
> and they were invented by the linguist Noam Chomsky for this purpose. 
> 
> By contrast, in computer science, as the use of recursively-defined concepts increased, 
> they were used more and more. 
> 
> In an early application, grammars are used to describe the structure of programming languages. 
> 
> In a newer application, they are used in an essential part of the Extensible Markup Language (XML) called the document type definition.
> 
> In linguistics, some authors use the term phrase structure grammar 
> to refer to context-free grammars, 
> whereby phrase-structure grammars are distinct from dependency grammars. 
> In computer science, a popular notation for context-free grammars is Backus–Naur form, or BNF.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Context-free%20grammar) 


#has_/created  :: [[Context-free_language]] 

There is an obvious relationship 
between the productions of the [[Context-free_grammar]] 
and the code for a recursive descending `Parser` class in [[Pattern~Little_Language]]. 

Because the relationship between the two is so obvious, 
you may feel tempted to skip writing the formal grammar 
and just define your little language with code. 
Skipping the formal grammar is usually a bad idea for the following reasons:

#has_/result_/negative :: Without a formal grammar, there is no precise way to **communicate the definition of your language** to other people without having them read your source code.
#has_/result_/negative :: As the syntax for languages becomes larger or more complex, so does the parser for the language. 
As the parser becomes more complex, the code becomes cluttered with necessary details and the relationship between the code and the grammar it implements becomes less obvious.
#has_/result_/negative :: Over time, languages often evolve, gaining new features. 
When trying to make changes to a language that has no formal grammar, 
you may find it difficult to distinguish between changes to the language's grammar 
and changes to its implementation.


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_Standards/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar|Context-free_grammar]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_public/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar.public|Context-free_grammar.public]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_internal/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar.internal|Context-free_grammar.internal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_protect/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar.protect|Context-free_grammar.protect]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_private/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar.private|Context-free_grammar.private]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_personal/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar.personal|Context-free_grammar.personal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_secret/Technology/IT/Software/Computer_Programming/Prog~Language/Context-free_grammar.secret|Context-free_grammar.secret]] 

