
# [[0.9_DL(Description_Logic)]] 

#is_/better_than :: [[0_ZOL(Propositional_Logic)]] 
#is_/worse_than :: [[1_FOL(First_Order_Logic)]] 


## #has_/feature 


### Unary Predicates;Classes 

AKA Concepts e.g., Human 

### binary Predicates;Relations

AKA Roles, similar to grammatical Roles, but arbitrary variety of Roles 
e.g., hasChild 

### Quantifiers only over Objects (∀x,∃x)

but with limited nesting Depth (unlike [[1_FOL(First_Order_Logic)]] ) 
to achieve computability. 

|     | Meaning                | Example     |
| --- | ---------------------- | ----------- |
| ∀x  | For all objects        | ∀x Human(x) |
| ∃x  | There exists an object | ∃x Human(x) |

Example:

- ∀x(Human(x)→Mortal(x)) 

These enable **general and existential statements**

## Missing Features 

| Feature                     | Status      | Reason                |
| --------------------------- | ----------- | --------------------- |
| Free variables              | Hidden      | Controlled syntax     |
| Higher-order quantification | Not allowed | Maintain tractability |

### [[Reification]] for n-ary Relations 

The Relation is modelled as an Object of a n-Ary Relation Class 
with n binary Relations to the Tuple-Members. 



## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> **Description Logic**s (DL) are a family of formal knowledge representation languages. 
> Many DLs are more expressive than propositional logic 
> but less expressive than first-order logic. 
> 
> In contrast to the latter, the core reasoning problems for DLs are (usually) decidable, 
> and efficient decision procedures have been implemented for these problems. 
> 
> There are general, spatial, temporal, spatiotemporal, and fuzzy description logics, 
> and each description logic features a different 
> **balance between expressive power and reasoning complexity** 
> by supporting different sets of mathematical constructors.
> 
> DLs are used in artificial intelligence 
> to describe and reason about the concepts of an application domain 
> (known as terminological knowledge). 
> 
> It is of particular importance in providing a 
> logical formalism for ontologies and the Semantic Web: 
> the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and its profiles are based on DLs. 
> 
> A major area of application of DLs and OWL is in biomedical informatics, 
> where they assist in the codification of biomedical knowledge. 
> 
> DLs and OWL are also applied in other domains, including 
> - defense, 
> - climate modeling, and 
> - large-scale industrial knowledge graphs.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Description%20logic) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_Standards/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic)|0.9_DL(Description_Logic)]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_public/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic).public|0.9_DL(Description_Logic).public]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_internal/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic).internal|0.9_DL(Description_Logic).internal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_protect/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic).protect|0.9_DL(Description_Logic).protect]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_private/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic).private|0.9_DL(Description_Logic).private]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_personal/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic).personal|0.9_DL(Description_Logic).personal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_secret/Philosophy/Logic/Logic(Math)/0.9_DL(Description_Logic).secret|0.9_DL(Description_Logic).secret]] 

