---
title: Canellales
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [magnoliids](magnoliids.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  magnoliids
    -   [Piperales](Piperales.md)
    -   Canellales
    -   [Magnoliales](Magnoliales.md)
    -   [Laurales](Laurales.md)

-   »

# Canellales 

![Winter\'s bark, Drimys winteri](drimys_002.jpg)

Containing group: [magnoliids](magnoliids.md)

### References

Carlquist, S. 2000. Wood and bark anatomy of Takhtajania (Winteraceae);
Phylogenetic and ecological implications. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden 87:317-322.

Doust, A. N. 2000. Comparative floral ontogeny in Winteraceae. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:366-379.

Doyle, J. A. 2000. Paleobotany, relationships, and geographic history of
Winteraceae. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87: 303-316.

Doyle, J. A., C. L. Hotton and J. V. Ward. 1990. Early Cretaceous
tetrads, zonasuculate pollen and Winteraeae. I. Taxonomy, morphology,
and ultrastructure. American Journal of Botany 77:1544-1557.

Doyle, J. A., C. L. Hotton and J. V. Ward. 1990. Early Cretaceous
tetrads, zonasuculate pollen, and Winteraceae. II. Cladistic analysis
and implications. American Journal of Botany 77:1558-1568.

Ehrendorfer, F. and M. Lambrou. 2000. Chromosomes of Takhtajania, other
Winteraceae, and Canellaceae: Phylogenetic implications. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 87:407-413.

Endress, P. K., A. Igersheim, F. B. Sampson, and G. E. Schatz. 2000.
Floral structure of Takhtajania and its systematic position in
Winteraceae. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:347-365.

Feild, T. S., T. Brodribb, and M. Holbrook. 2002. Hardly a relict:
Freezing and the evolution of vesselless wood in winteraceae. Evolution
56:464-478.

Feild, T. S., M. A. Zwieniecki, and M. Holbrook. 2000. Winteraceae
evolution: An ecophysiological perspective. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden 87:323-334.

Karol, K. G., Y. B. Suh, G. E. Schatz, and E. A. Zimmer. 2000. Molecular
evidence for the phylogenetic position of Takhtajania in the
Winteraceae: Inference from nuclear ribosomal and chloroplast gene
spacer sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:414-432.

Sampson, F. B. 2000. The pollen of Takhtajania perrieri (Winteraceae).
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:380-388.

Schatz, G. E., P. P. Lowry, and A. Ramisamihantanirina. 1998.
Takhtajania perrieri rediscovered. Nature 391:133-134.

Suh, Y., L. B. Thien, H. E. Reeve and E. A. Zimmer. 1993. Molecular
evolution and phylogenetic implications of internal transcribed spacer
sequences of ribosomal DNA Winteraceae. American Journal of Botany
80:1042-1055.

Tobe, H. and B. Sampson. 2000. Embryology of Takhtajania (Winteraceae)
and a summary statement of embryological features for the family. Annals
of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:389-397.

Van der Ham, R., and B. J. Van Heuven. 2002. Evolutionary trends in
Winteraceae pollen. Grana 41:4-9.

Vink, W. 1988. Taxonomy in Winteraceae. Taxon 37:691-698.

Vink, W. 1993. Winteraceae. Pages 630-638 in: The Families and Genera of
Vascular Plants. II. Flowering Plants: Dicotyledons, Magnoliid,
Hamamelid and Caryophyllid Families. K. Kubitzki, J. G. Rohwer, and V.
Bittrich, eds. Springer, Berlin.

Walker, J. W., G. J. Breener, and A. G. Walker. 1983. Winteraceaeous
pollen in the Lower Cretaceous of Israel: early evidence of a
magnolialean angiosperm family. Science 220:1273-1275.

##### Title Illustrations

![Winter\'s bark, Drimys winteri](drimys.jpg)

  -----------
  Scientific Name ::  Drimys winteri
  Comments          Winter\'s bark
  Copyright ::         © 1995 M. J. Donoghue
  -----------