---
title: Acantheae
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Acanthaceae](Acanthaceae.md)
    -   [Lamiales](Lamiales.md)
    -   [Asterids](Asterids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Acanthaceae
    -   [Ruellieae](Ruellieae.md)
    -   Acantheae

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Acanthus Clade](Acanthus_Clade)
    -   [Acanthopsis](Acanthopsis.md)
    -   [Blepharis](Blepharis.md)
    -   [Cynarospermum         asperrimum](Cynarospermum_asperrimum)
    -   [Crossandrella dusenii](Crossandrella_dusenii)
    -   [Streptosiphon hirsutus](Streptosiphon_hirsutus)
    -   [Sclerochiton](Sclerochiton.md)
    -   [Crossandra](Crossandra.md)
    -   [Stenandriopsis Clade](Stenandriopsis_Clade)
    -   [Stenandrium Clade](Stenandrium_Clade)
    -   [Other New World         Acantheae](Other_New_World_Acantheae)

# Acantheae 

[Lucinda A. McDade and Carrie Kiel](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots/Asterids/Lamiales/Acanthaceae/Acantheae/Aphelandra_002.jpg)
![ ](blepharis1.jpg)
![](Holographis_argyrea33_002.jpg)
![ ](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots/Asterids/Lamiales/Acanthaceae/Acantheae/sclerock_002.jpg)

Containing group: [Acanthaceae](Acanthaceae.md)

### Introduction

Acantheae are well supported as the basal lineage of core Acanthaceae
(i.e., those plants with retinaculate fruits) and also as a clade.  The
group has  about 500 species that are currently placed in about 20
genera (but this taxonomy does not entirely reflect our recent
phylogenetic results:  McDade et al. 2005).  Plants belonging to this
lineage occur in both the New and Old Worlds; in the Old World, the vast
majority of species occur in Africa with just a few in southern Europe
and in Asia.

### Characteristics

Among Acanthaceae, Acantheae are marked by the synapomorphy of
monothecate anthers.  A few other distantly related lineages of
Acanthaceae have monothecate stamens (e.g., core Isoglossinae of
Justicieae, McDade et al. 2000a, Kiel et al. 2006) but, in these
lineages, the loss of one theca per stamen seems to have occurred after
reduction to two stamens.  In contrast, Acantheae retain the
plesiomorphic trait of four stamens, and this combination of stamen
(four) and thecae (one) number is, to our knowledge, unique among
Acanthaceae. 

![ ](2aph.jpg)

Note the four stamens, each with a single theca or anther sac.  This
combination of traits is synapomorphic for Acantheae. © Lucinda McDade

Most New World Acantheae, members of the *Stenandriopsis* clade,
*Crossandra*, *Sclerochiton*, and *Streptosiphon* have a five-lobed
calyx with at least slightly unequal segments: the dorsal lobe is
widest, the paired anterior lobes are narrower, and the paired lateral
lobes are narrowest.   We have proposed that the unequal, 1,2,2
configuration of the calyx is a synapomorphy for Acantheae (McDade et
al. 2005).  The trait has been further modified in the members of the
one-lipped clade that have a four-lobed calyx (see Fig. 2g in McDade et
al. 2005), and also in at least some members of the *Stenandrium* clade
that have narrow, apparently equal segments.  At least the basal members
of the other main lineages of Acanthaceae s.s. have a calyx of five
equal lobes, although there are further modifications in some lineages,
notably Barlerieae.   

As the phylogeny above suggests, the two main lineages of Acantheae can
be characterized as having a plesiomorphic two-lipped corolla or a
synapomorphic one-lipped corolla.  As is typical of Acanthaceae and
Lamiales in general, two-lipped corollas have two lobes in the upper lip
and three lobes in the lower lip.  Plants in the one-lipped clade have
all five lobes of the corolla directed ventrally such that the plants
lack an upper lip (although in some, the dorsal sepal seems to fulfill
that role functionally).  

### References

Benoist, R. 1930. Descriptons d'espèces nouvelles d'Acanthacées de
Madagascar. Bulletin de la Société botanique de France 76: 1031-1038.

Benoist, R. 1967. Acanthacées. In H. Humbert, Flore de Madagascar et des
Comores 182, tome 1: 1-230.

Bentham, G. and J. D. Hooker. 1876. Genera Plantarum 2: 1060-1122.
London: Reeve.

Daniel, T. F. 1983. Systematics of Holographis (Acanthaceae). Journal of
the Arnold Arboretum 64: 129-160.

Daniel, T. F. 1985. A revision of Stenandrium (Acanthaceae) in Mexico
and adjacent regions. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 71:
1028-1043.

Daniel, T. F. 1991. A revision of Aphelandra (Acanthaceae) in Mexico.
Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences 47: 235-274.

Daniel, T. F. 2000. Additional chromosome numbers of American
Acanthaceae. Systematic Botany 25: 15-25.

Daniel, T. F. and T. I. Chuang. 1998. Chromosome numbers of cultivated
Acanthaceae and systematic implications. Pp. 309\--330 in Diversity and
taxonomy of tropical flowering plants, eds. P. Mathew and M. Sivadasan.
Calicut, India: Mentor Books.

Daniel, T. F., T. I. Chuang, and M. A. Baker. 1990. Chromosome numbers
of American Acanthaceae. Systematic Botany 15: 13-25.

Furness, C. A. 1990. Pollen morphology of Crossandra and Crossandrella
(Acanthaceae: Acantheae). Grana 29: 161-176.

Furness, C. A. 1994. The caveate pollen of Streptosiphon hirsutus
(Acanthaceae: Acantheae) and its taxonomic significance. Kew Bulletin
49: 409-414.

Grisebach, A. 1858. Novitiae florae panamensis. Bonplandia 6: 2-12.

Grisebach, A. H. R. 1864. Flora of the British West Indian Islands.
London: Reeve and Co.

Heine, H. 1966. Acanthacées. Vol. 13 in Flore de Gabon, A. Aubréville
(ed.). Paris: Muséum National D'Histoire Naturelle.

Hooker, W. J. 1837. Icones Plantarum, Volume 2. London: Longman, Rees,
Orme, Brown, Green and Longman.

Hooker, W. J. 1845. Curtis's botanical magazine, Volume 71. London:
Reeve Bros.

Leonard, E. C. 1953. The Acanthaceae of Colombia, II. Contributions from
the United States National Herbarium 31: 119-322.

Mangenot, S. and G. Mangenot. 1962. Enquête sur les nombres
chromosomiques dans une collection d\'espèces tropicales. Revue de
Cytologie et de Biologie Végetales 25: 411-447.

Manktelow, M. 1996. Phaulopsis (Acanthaceae)---a monograph. Symbolae
Botanicae Upsalienses 31: 1-184.

Manktelow, M., L. A. McDade, B. Oxelman, C. A. Furness, and M.-J.
Balkwill. 2001. The enigmatic tribe Whitfieldieae (Acanthaceae):
delimitation and phylogenetic relationships based on molecular and
morphological data. Systematic Botany 26: 104-119.

McDade, L. A. 1982. Three new species of Aphelandra (Acanthaceae) from
Central America. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 69: 402-411.

McDade, L. A. 1984. Systematics and reproductive biology of the Central
American species of the Aphelandra pulcherrima complex (Acanthaceae).
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 71: 104-165.

McDade, L. A. 1992. Pollinator relationships, biogeography, and
phylogenetics. BioScience 42: 21-26.

McDade, L. A. and M. L. Moody. 1999. Phylogenetic relationships among
Acanthaceae: evidence from non-coding trnL-trnF chloroplast DNA
sequences. American Journal of Botany 86: 70-80.

McDade, L. A. and M. D. Turner. 1997. Extrafloral nectaries in
Aphelandra: anatomy, development and systematic implications. American
Journal of Botany 84: 1 15.

McDade, L. A., T. F. Daniel, S. E. Masta, and K. M. Riley. 2000a.
Phylogenetic relationships within the tribe Justicieae (Acanthaceae):
evidence from molecular sequences, morphology, and cytology. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 87: 435-458.

McDade, L. A., S. E. Masta, M. L. Moody, and E. Waters. 2000b.
Phylogenetic relationships among Acanthaceae: evidence from two genomes.
Systematic Botany 25: 105-120.

McDade, L. A., T. F. Daniel, C. A. Kiel, and K. Vollesen. 2005.
Phylogenetic relatinships among Acantheae (Acanthaceae): Major lineages
present contrasting patterns of molecular evolution and morphological
differentiation. Systematic Botany 30: 834-862.

Moylan, E. C., J. R. Bennett, M. A. Carine, R. G. Olmstead, and R. W.
Scotland. 2004. Phylogenetic relationships among Strobilanthes s.l.
(Acanthaceae): evidence from ITS nrDNA, trnL-F cpDNA, and morphology.
American Journal of Botany 91: 724-735.

Schwarzbach, A. E. and L. A. McDade. 2002. Phylogenetic relationships of
the mangrove family Avicenniaceae based on chloroplast and nuclear
ribosomal DNA sequences. Systematic Botany 27: 84-98.

Scotland, R.W. and K. Vollesen. 2000. Classification of Acanthaceae. Kew
Bulletin 55: 513-589.

Scotland, R.W., J. A. Sweere, P. A. Reeves, and R. G. Olmstead. 1995.
Higher-level systematics of Acanthaceae determined by chloroplast DNA
sequences. American Journal of Botany 82: 266-275.

Swofford, D. L. 2000. PAUP\*. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony
(\*And Other Methods). Version 4. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates.

Taberlet, P., L. Gielly, G. Pautou, and J. Bouvet. 1991. Universal
primers for amplification of three non-coding regions of chloroplast
DNA. Plant Molecular Biology 17: 1105-1109.

Tomlinson, P. B. 1986. The botany of mangroves. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Vollesen, K. 1990a. Notes on Crossandra (Acanthaceae). Kew Bulletin 45:
121-135.

Vollesen, K. 1990b. The genus Crossandra (Acanthaceae) in the African
continent. Kew Bulletin 45: 503-534.

Vollesen, K. 1991. A revision of the African genus Sclerochiton
(Acanthaceae: Acantheae). Kew Bulletin 46: 1-50.

Vollesen, K. 1992. The Old World species of Stenandrium (Acanthaceae:
Acantheae). Kew Bulletin 47: 169-202.

Vollesen, K. 1994. The genus Streptosiphon (Acanthaceae: Acantheae). Kew
Bulletin 9: 401-407.

Vollesen, K. 1997. Synopsis of the genus Crossandra (Acanthaceae) in
Madagascar. Kew Bulletin 52: 379-415.

Vollesen, K. 1999. Cynarospermum, a new genus of Acanthaceae from India.
Kew Bulletin 54: 171-177.

Vollesen, K. 2000. Blepharis (Acanthaceae): a taxonomic revision. Kew:
Royal Botanic Gardens.

Wasshausen, D. C. 1975. The genus Aphelandra (Acanthaceae). Smithsonian
Contributions to Botany no. 18.

##### Title Illustrations

![](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots/Asterids/Lamiales/Acanthaceae/Aphelandra.jpg)

  -----------------
  Scientific Name ::     Aphelandra impressa Lindau (Acantheae)
  Location ::           Venezuela
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        L. A. McDade
  Copyright ::            © 2006 Mark Skinner
  -----------------
![](blepharis1_002.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Blepharis Juss.
  Location ::           Davenham, South Africa
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Collection           J
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [Lucinda A. McDade](mailto:lucinda.mcdade@cgu.edu) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
![](Holographis_argyrea33.jpg)

  ---------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Encephalosphaera lasiandra Mildbr.
  Location ::           Peru
  Comments             Image is on a herbarium at F
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Collector            J. G. Graham & J. Schunke Vigo
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [Field Museum](mailto:mcdade@acnatsci.org)
  ---------------------
![](sclerock.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Stenandrium guineensis (Nees) Vollesen
  Location ::           Greenhouses, Kew Botanical Garden, Richmond England
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        K. Vollesen
  Copyright ::            © 2006 [Lucinda A. McDade](mailto:lucinda.mcdade@cgu.edu) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------