---
title: magnoliids
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Angiosperms
    -   [Amborella trichopoda](Amborella_trichopoda.md)
    -   magnoliids
    -   [Chloranthaceae](Chloranthaceae.md)
    -   [Ceratophyllaceae](Ceratophyllaceae.md)
    -   [Monocotyledons](Monocotyledons.md)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Austrobaileyales](Austrobaileyales.md)
    -   [Nymphaeaceae](Nymphaeaceae.md)

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Piperales](Piperales.md)
    -   [Canellales](Canellales.md)
    -   [Magnoliales](Magnoliales.md)
    -   [Laurales](Laurales.md)

# magnoliids 

[Pam Soltis, Doug Soltis, and Christine Edwards](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](asimina.jpg)
![](AristolochiatrilobataBlanco2685FLAS3_002.jpg)
![](tasstipitatafemalematyas1_002.jpg)

Relationships after Zanis et al. (2002, 2003) and Qiu et al. (1999).

Containing group: [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [Angiosperm Phylogeny     Website](http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/research/APweb/welcome.html). P. F.
    Stevens, Missouri Botanical Garden.
-   [Deep Time Project: A Comprehensive Phylogenetic Tree of Living and     Fossil Angiosperms](http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu./deeptime/). Florida
    Museum of Natural History.
-   [Treezilla (500-taxon rbcL     Analyses)](http://green.harvard.edu/%7Erice/treezilla). Ken Rice,
    Michael Donoghue, Dick Olmstead
-   [The Families of Flowering     Plants](http://biodiversity.uno.edu/delta/angio/index.htm). L.
    Watson and M. J. Dallwitz.
-   [Images and Descriptions of Flowering Plant Families (as treated by     Arthur     Cronquist)](http://www.botany.hawaii.edu/faculty/carr/fpfamilies.htm).
    University of Hawaii Botany Department.
-   [Flowering Plant     Gateway](http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/newgate/cronang.htm). Hugh
    Wilson, Texas A&M Bioinformatics Working Group.
-   [Classification of Flowering     Plants](http://www.systbot.uu.se/classification/overview.html). Kåre
    Bremer, Birgitta Bremer & Mats Thulin, Uppsala University.
-   [Thonner\'s analytical key to the families of flowering     plants](http://home.iae.nl/users/linea/index.html)
-   [The Virtual Flower](http://128.118.180.140/fgp/index.html). Floral
    Genome Project (FGP).
-   [The Myristicaceae     Pages](http://www.botanypages.org/janovec/myristicaceae).
    John Janovic, Manoj Mistry, and Roosevelt García Villacorta.

### Introduction

The magnoliid clade contains several thousand (\~8500) species divided
into 20 families, including several large, economically important
families such as Magnoliaceae, Lauraceae, Piperaceae, and Annonaceae.
Members of the magnoliid clade are widespread throughout tropical and
temperate areas of the world and can be large trees, shrubs, vines,
lianas, and occasionally herbs (Judd et al., 2002; D. Soltis et al.,
2005). Economically important products derived from magnoliids include
edible fruits, such as avocados (*Persea americana*) and guanabana, sour
sop, cherimoya, and sweet sop (*Annona* spp.). Magnoliid species are
also the source of spices (Judd et al., 2002; D. Soltis et al., 2005)
such as black and white pepper (*Piper nigrum*), bay leaves (*Laurus
nigrus*), nutmeg (*Myristica fragrans*), cinnamon (*Cinnamomum verum*),
and camphor (*Cinnamomum camphora*). Other members are used as
ornamentals or timber (e.g., *Magnolia* and *Liriodendron*; Judd et al.,
2002; D. Soltis et al., 2005).

### Characteristics

The magnoliid clade contains most of those lineages that were typically
referred to as \"primitive angiosperms\" in earlier classification
schemes (e.g., Cronquist, 1981, 1988; Stebbins, 1974; Takhtajan, 1997);
most of these \"primitive\" species have long, broad, net-veined leaves
and large flowers with numerous, spirally arranged tepals (perianth
parts that are not differentiated into petals and sepals), stamens, and
carpels. Some also have leaf-like, or \"laminar,\" stamens. However,
while these classification systems (for example Cronquist\'s subclass
Magnoliidae) united some of the families that are currently
circumscribed as magnoliids, phylogenetic analyses have shown that these
previous classifications also included groups that are unrelated to the
magnoliid clade, such as *Amborella* and Austrobaileyales. Moreover,
these classifications also excluded members, such as *Lactoris*, that
were difficult to place in the magnoliids because the group is very old
(some hypothesized members, such as *Archaeanthus* (Dilcher and Crane
1984) date to the early Cretaceous) and extinction has likely obscured
many of the evolutionary relationships (see Soltis et al 2005).

The major lineages of magnoliids were first identified in studies using
DNA evidence (e.g., P. Soltis et al., 1999); however the composition of
the magnoliid clade and relationships among the members did not become
clear until data sets of at least five genes for a broad sample of taxa
were assembled to address these problems (e.g., Qiu et al., 1999, 2000;
Zanis et al., 2002). Several possible morphological characteristics have
now been identified that may unite magnoliids. Some (although obscure)
possible synapomorphies (shared, derived characteristics) include entire
leaf margins, extrorse anthers, ephemeral antipodal cells, the presence
of hypostase, the presence of a nucellar cap, and raphal bundle branches
at the chalaza ([Angiosperm Phylogeny Website](http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/research/APweb/welcome.html), 2005).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Within the magnoliids, researchers have identified four evolutionary
lineages and clarified their evolutionary relationships: Magnoliales and
Laurales are sisters, and Piperales and Canellales are sisters. The
circumscription of these orders and their interrelationships had not
been proposed previously based on morphology alone.

***Magnoliales.*** Based on molecular analyses, this group includes six
families (Myristicaceae, Degeneriaceae, Himantandraceae, Magnoliaceae,
Eupomatiaceae, and Annonaceae), relationships among which are now clear
(e.g., Sauquet et al., 2003). This same clade also emerged in the
nonmolecular analysis of Doyle and Endress (2000). Apparent
synapomorphies for the clade include reduced fiber pit borders,
stratified phloem, an adaxial plate of vascular tissue in the petiole,
palisade parenchyma, asterosclereids in the leaf mesophyll, continuous
tectum in the pollen, and multiplicative testa in the seed (Doyle and
Endress, 2000). Furthermore, all members of this clade examined to date
have a characteristic deletion in their *Apetala3* gene (Kim et al.,
2004a).

![ ](Eupomatia.jpg)

*Magnolia tripetala*, a member of Magnoliaceae (photo © Kurt Stuber),
and *Eupomatia benettii*, a representative of Epomatiaceae (photo ©
Peter Endress).

***Laurales.*** Laurales, as currently circumscribed (APG II, 2003; see
Renner, 1999), include seven families: Calycanthaceae (including
Idiospermaceae), Monimiaceae, Gomortegaceae, Atherospermataceae,
Lauraceae, Siparunaceae, and Hernandiaceae. In previous classifications
(e.g., Cronquist, 1981, 1988), Amborellaceae and Trimeniaceae were
occasionally placed in Laurales; and in fact, both *Amborella* and
*Trimenia* have even been considered part of Monimiaceae (Perkins, 1925;
see [Angiosperms](http://www.tolweb.org/tree?group=Angiosperms) for a
discussion of the placement of these families). Chloranthaceae have also
occasionally been placed in Laurales (e.g., Takhtajan, 1987, 1997;
Thorne, 1974; see
[Angiosperms](http://www.tolweb.org/tree?group=Angiosperms) for a
discussion of its placement). Laurales are united by a perigynous flower
in which the gynoecium is frequently deeply embedded in a fleshy
receptacle (Endress and Igersheim, 1997; Renner, 1999). Other apparent
non-DNA synapomorphies include the presence of inner staminodia,
ascendant ovules, and tracheidal endotesta (Doyle and Endress, 2000).

![ ](perseaamericanaflmatyas1.jpg)

Photo of *Persea americana*, a representative of Lauraceae (photo ©
Matyas Buzgo).

***Piperales.*** Previous circumscriptions of Piperales have varied
(e.g., Dahlgren, 1980; Cronquist, 1981, 1988; Takhtajan, 1987, 1997;
Thorne, 1992; Heywood, 1993), but molecular studies clearly united
Aristolochiaceae, Lactoridaceae, Piperaceae, and Saururaceae (e.g., Qiu
et al., 1999; P. Soltis et al., 1999; Barkman et al., 2000; D. Soltis et
al., 2000; Zanis et al., 2002). In addition, recent studies have placed
Hydnoraceae, a family of parasitic plants often placed in Rosidae (e.g.,
Cronquist, 1981; Heywood, 1993), within Piperales, although the exact
position is not certain (Nickrent et al., 2002). Although not recognized
as a group prior to molecular analyses, a number of morphological
synapomorphies have been identified: distichous phyllotaxis, a single
prophyll, and oil cells (Doyle and Endress, 2000).

![](sau-houttunynacordata-matyas.jpg)

The flower of *Aristolochia sprucei*, a representative of
Aristolochiaceae (photo © Mario Blanco), the inflorescence of *Piper
capense*, in the Piperaceae (photo © Matyas Buzgo), and the
inflorescence of *Houttuynia cordata*, a representative of Saururaceae
(photo © Matyas Buzgo).

***Canellales.*** The relationship of Canellaceae and Winteraceae has
been strongly supported in all multigene analyses (e.g., Qiu et al.,
1999; P. Soltis et al., 1999; D. Soltis et al., 2000; Zanis et al.,
2002, 2003), and the clade was also obtained in Doyle and Endress\'s
(2000) nonmolecular analysis. However, these two families have not
typically been considered closely related to each other, and neither was
suspected of being related to any members of Piperales. For example,
Winteraceae have often been considered a close relative of Magnoliaceae
(e.g., Cronquist, 1981, 1988; Heywood, 1993), with Canellaceae close to
Myristicaceae (e.g., Wilson, 1966; Cronquist, 1981, 1988). Furthermore,
intuitive classification systems regarded Winteraceae as perhaps the
\"most primitive\" extant family of angiosperms (Cronquist, 1981;
Endress, 1986). The phylogenetic position of Winteraceae clearly
indicates that the vesselless xylem and plicate carpels found in members
of the family are secondarily derived (see also Young, 1981). Possible
synapomorphies for Canellales are a well-differentiated pollen tube
transmitting tissue, an outer integument with only two to four cell
layers, and seeds with a palisade exotesta (Doyle and Endress, 2000).
Additional synapomorphies may include an irregular \"first-rank\" leaf
venation (Hickey and Wolf, 1975; Doyle and Endress, 2000), features of
stelar and nodal structure (Keating, 2000), and vascularization of the
seeds (Deroin, 2000).

![ ](tasmaniastipitatamatyas1.jpg)

The male inflorescence of *Tasmannia stipitata* (photo © Matyas Buzgo),
a representative of Winteraceae.

### References

Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG). 1998. An ordinal classification for
the families of flowering plants. Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 85: 531-553.

Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG II). 2003. An update of the Angiosperm
Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering
plants: APG II. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 141: 399-436.

Baillon, H. 1869. Histoires des plantes, vol. 1. L. Hachette & Cie.
Paris, France.

Barkman, T. J., G. Chenery, J. R. Mcneal, J. Lyons-Weiler, and C. W.
Depamphilis. 2000. Independent and combined analyses of sequences from
all three genomic compartments converge on the root of flowering plant
phylogeny. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 97:
13166-13171.

Basinger, J., and D. L. Dilcher. 1984. Ancient bisexual flowers. Science
224: 511-513.

Braun, A. 1864. Uebersicht der naturlichen Systems nach der Anordnung
derselben. In P. Ascherson \[ed.\], Flora der Provinz Brandenburg, der
Altmark und des Herzogthums Magdeburg, vol. 1, 22-67. Hirschwald,
Berlin, Germany.

Carlquist, S. 1990. Wood anatomy and relationships of Lactoridaceae.
American Journal of Botany 77:1498-1505.

Carlquist, S. 2000. Wood and bark anatomy of Takhtajania (Winteraceae);
Phylogenetic and ecological implications. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden 87:317-322.

Chanderbali, A. S., H. van der Werff, and S. S. Renner. 2001. Phylogeny
and historical biogeography of Lauraceae: Evidence from the chloroplast
and nuclear genomes. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 88:104-134.

Chase, M. W., and V. A. Albert. 1998. A perspective on the contribution
of plastid rbcL DNA sequences to angiosperm phylogenetics. In D. E.
Soltis, P. S. Soltis, and J. J. Doyle \[eds.\], Molecular systematics of
plants, vol. 2: DNA sequencing, 488-507. Kluwer, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Chase, M. W., D. E. Soltis, R. G. Olmstead, D. Morgan, D. H. Les, B. D.
Mishler, M. R. Duvall, R. A. Price, H. G. Hills, Y.-L. Qiu, K. A. Kron,
J. H. Rettig, E. Conti, J. D. Palmer, J. R. Manhart, K. J. Sytsma, H. J.
Michaels, W. J. Kress, K. G. Karol, W. D. Clark, M. Hedren, B. S. Gaut,
R. K. Jansen, K.-J. Kim, C. F. Wimpee, J. F. Smith, G. R. Furnier, S. H.
Strauss, Q.-Y. Xiang, G. M. Plunkett, P. S. Soltis, S. M. Swensen, S. E.
Williams, P. A. Gadek, C. J. Quinn, L. E. Eguiarte, E. Golenberg, G. H.
Learn, Jr., S. W. Graham, S. C. H. Barrett, S. Dayanandan, and V. A.
Albert. 1993. Phylogenetics of seed plants: an analysis of nucleotide
sequences from the plastid gene rbcL. Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 80: 528-580.

Couper, R. A. 1958. British Mesozoic microspores and pollen grains: a
systematic and stratigraphic study. Palaeontographica. Abteilung B,
Paläophytologie 103: 75-179.

Crane, P. R., E. M. Friis, and K.R. Pedersen. 1995. The origin and early
diversification of angiosperms. Nature 374: 27-33.

Cronquist, A. 1981. An integrated system of classification of flowering
plants. Columbia University Press, New York, USA.

Cronquist, A. 1988. The evolution and classification of flowering
plants, 2nd ed. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York, USA.

Dahlgren, R. 1980. A revised system of classification of the
angiosperms. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 80: 91-124.

Davies, T. J., T. G. Barraclough, M. W. Chase, P. S. Soltis, D. E.
Soltis, And V. Savolainen. 2004. Darwin\'s abominable mystery: insights
from a supertree of the angiosperms. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA 101: 1904-1909.

De Jussieu, A. L. 1789. Genera plantarum secundum ordines naturals
disposita. Heissant and Barrois, Paris, France.

Deroin, T. 2000. Notes on the vascular anatomy of the fruit of
Takhtajania (Winteraceae) and its interpretation. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden 87: 398-406.

Dilcher, D. L., and Crane, P. R. 1984. Archaeanthus: an early angiosperm
from the Cenomanian of the western interior of North America. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 71: 351-383.

Donoghue, M. J., and J. A. Doyle. 1989. Phylogenetic studies of seed
plants and angiosperms based on morphological characters. In K. Bremer
and H. Jörnvall \[eds.\], The hierarchy of life: molecules and
morphology in phylogenetic studies, 181-193. Elsevier Science
Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Doust, A. N. 2000. Comparative floral ontogeny in Winteraceae. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:366-379.

Doyle, J. A. 2000. Paleobotany, relationships, and geographic history of
Winteraceae. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87: 303-316.

Doyle, J. A., and M. J. Donoghue. 1986. Seed plant phylogeny and the
origin of the angiosperms: an experimental cladistic approach. Botanical
Review 52: 321-431.

Doyle, J. A., and M. J. Donoghue. 1992. Fossils and seed plant phylogeny
reanalzyed. Brittonia 44: 89-106.

Doyle, J. A., M. J. Donoghue and E. A. Zimmer. 1994. Integration of
morphological and rRNA data on the origin of angiosperms. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 81:419-450.

Doyle, J. A., C. L. Hotton and J. V. Ward. 1990. Early Cretaceous
tetrads, zonasuculate pollen and Winteraeae. I. Taxonomy, morphology,
and ultrastructure. American Journal of Botany 77:1544-1557.

Doyle, J. A., C. L. Hotton and J. V. Ward. 1990. Early Cretaceous
tetrads, zonasuculate pollen, and Winteraceae. II. Cladistic analysis
and implications. American Journal of Botany 77:1558-1568.

Doyle, J. A., and P. K. Endress. 2000. Morphological phylogenetic
analyses of basal angiosperms: comparison and combination with molecular
data. International Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement):
S121-S153.

Drinnan, A. N., P. R. Crane, E. M. Friis, and K. R. Pedersen. 1990.
Lauraceous flowers from the Potomac group (mid-Cretaceous) of eastern
North America. Botanical Gazette 151:370-384.

Ehrendorfer, F. and M. Lambrou. 2000. Chromosomes of Takhtajania, other
Winteraceae, and Canellaceae: Phylogenetic implications. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 87:407-413.

Eklund, H. 2000. Lauraceous flowers from the Late Cretaceous of North
Carolina, USA. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 132:397-428.

Endress, P. K. 1984. The flowering process in the Eupomatiaceae
(Magnoliales). Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 104:297-319.

Endress, P. K. 1986. Reproductive structures and phylogenetic
significance of extant primitive angiosperms. Plant Systematic Evolution
152: 1-28.

Endress, P. K. 2001. The flowers in extant basal angiosperms and
inferences on ancestral flowers. International Journal of Plant Sciences
162: 1111-1140.

Endress, P. K., and A. Igersheim. 1997. Gynoecium diversity and
systematics of the Laurales. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society
125: 93-168.

Endress, P. K., and A. Igersheim. 2000a. The reproductive structures of
the basal angiosperm Amborella trichopoda (Amborellaceae). International
Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement): S237-S248.

Endress, P. K., and A. Igersheim. 2000b. Gynoecium structure and
evolution in basal angiosperms. International Journal of Plant Sciences
161 (Supplement): S211-S223.

Endress, P. K., A. Igersheim, F. B. Sampson, and G. E. Schatz. 2000.
Floral structure of Takhtajania and its systematic position in
Winteraceae. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:347-365.

Feild, T. S., T. Brodribb, and M. Holbrook. 2002. Hardly a relict:
Freezing and the evolution of vesselless wood in Winteraceae. Evolution
56:464-478.

Feild, T. S., M. A. Zwieniecki, and M. Holbrook. 2000. Winteraceae
evolution: An ecophysiological perspective. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden 87:323-334.

Friis, E. M., K. R. Pedersen, and P. R. Crane. 2000. Reproductive
structure and organization of basal angiosperms from the early
Cretaceous (Barremian or Aptian) of western Portugal. International
Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement): S169-S182.

Gandolfo, M. A., K. C. Nixon, and W. L. Crepet. 2002. Triuridaceae
fossil flowers from the Upper Cretaceous of New Jersey. American Journal
of Botany 89: 1940-1957.

Gandolfo, M. A., K. C. Nixon, and W. L. Crepet. 2004. Cretaceous flowers
of Nymphaeaceae and implications for complex insect entrapment
pollinations mechanisms in early Angiosperms. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA: online.

Gonzalez, F. and P. Rudall. 2001. The questionable affinities of
Lactoris: Evidence from branching pattern, inflorescence morphology, and
stipule development. American Journal of Botany 88:2143-2150.

Gottsberger, G. 1988. The reproductive biology of primitive angiosperms.
Taxon 37: 630-643.

Graham, S. W., and R. G. Olmstead. 2000. Utility of 17 chloroplast genes
for inferring the phylogeny of the basal angiosperms. American Journal
of Botany 87: 1712-1730.

Heo, K., H. van der Werff, and H. Tobe. 1998. Embryology and
relationships of Lauraceae (Laurales). Botanical Journal of the Linnean
Society 126:295-322.

Heywood, V. 1993. Flowering plants of the world. B.T. Batsford Ltd.,
London, UK.

Hickey, L. J., and A. D. Wolfe. 1975. The bases of angiosperm phylogeny:
vegetative morphology. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 62:
538-589.

Hilu, K. W., T. Borsch, K. Muller, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, V.
Savolainen, M. Chase, M. Powell, L. Alice, R. Evans, H. Sauquet, C.
Neinhuis, T. Slotta, J. Rohwer, and L. Chatrou. 2003. Inference of
angiosperm phylogeny based on matK sequence information. American
Journal of Botany 90: 1758-1776.

Hoot, S. B., S. Magallón, and P. R. Crane. 1999. Phylogeny of basal
eudicots based on three molecular data sets: atpB, rbcL, and 18S nuclear
ribosomal DNA sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 86:
1-32.

Igersheim, A. and P. K. Endress. 1998. Gynoecium diversity and
systematics of the paleoherbs. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society
127:289-370.

Judd, W. S., C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, and M. J.
Donoghue. 2002. Plant systematics: a phylogenetic approach. Sinauer
Associates, Inc., Sunderland, Massachusetts, USA.

Karol, K. G., Y. B. Suh, G. E. Schatz, and E. A. Zimmer. 2000. Molecular
evidence for the phylogenetic position of Takhtajania in the
Winteraceae: Inference from nuclear ribosomal and chloroplast gene
spacer sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:414-432.

Keating, R. C. 2000. Anatomy of the young vegetative shoot of
Takhtajania perrieri (Winteraceae). Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 87: 335-346.

Kim, S., V. A. Albert, M.-J. Yoo, J. S. Farris, M. Zanis, P. S. Soltis,
and D. E. Soltis. 2004a. Pre-angiosperm duplication of floral genes and
regulatory tinkering at the base of flowering plants. American Journal
of Botany: in press.

Kimoto, Y. and H. Tobe. 2001. Embryology of Laurales: a review and
perspectives. Journal of Plant Research 114:247-267.

Kramer, E. M., R. L. Dorit, and V. F. Irish. 1998. Molecular evolution
of genes controlling petal and stamen development: Duplication and
divergence within the APETALA3 and PISTILLATA MADS-box gene lineages.
Genetics 149: 765-783.

Litt, A., and V. Irish. 2003. Duplication and diversification in the
APETALA1/FRUITFULL floral homeotic gene lineage: implications for the
evolution of floral development. Genetics 165: 821-833.

Loconte, H., and D. W. Stevenson. 1991. Cladistics of the Magnoliidae.
Cladistics 7: 267-296.

Mathews, S., and M. J. Donoghue. 1999. The root of angiosperm phylogeny
inferred from duplicate phytochrome genes. Science 286: 947-949.

Mathews, S., and M. J. Donoghue. 2000. Basal angiosperm phylogeny
inferred from duplicate phytochromes A and C. International Journal of
Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement): S41-S55.

Nandi, O. I., M. W. Chase, and P. K. Endress. 1998. A combined cladistic
analysis of angiosperms using rbcL and nonmolecular data sets. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 85: 137 - 212.

Nickrent, D. L., A. Blarer, Y.-L. Qiu, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, and
M. Zanis. 2002. Molecular data place Hydnoraceae with Aristolochiaceae.
American Journal of Botany 89: 1809-1817.

Nickerson, J., and G. Drouin. 2004. The sequence of the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II is a useful marker for inferring seed plant
phylogeny. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 31: 403-415.

Parkinson, C. L., K. L. Adams, and J. D. Palmer. 1999. Multigene
analyses identify the three earliest lineages of extant flowering
plants. Current Biology 9: 1485-1488.

Perkins, J. 1925. Ubersicht uber die Gattungen der Monimiaceae.
Engelmann, Leipzig, Germany.

Qiu, Y. L., M. W. Chase, D. H. Les and C. R. Parks. 1993. Molecular
phylogenetics of the Magnoliidae: cladistic analyses of nucleotide
sequences of the plastid gene rbcL. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 80:587-606.

Qiu, Y.-L., J. Lee, F. Bernasconi-Quadroni, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis,
M. Zanis, Z. Chen, V. Savolainen, and M. W. Chase. 1999. The earliest
angiosperms: evidence from mitochondrial, plastid and nuclear genomes.
Nature 402: 404-407.

Qiu, Y.-L., J.-Y. Lee, F. Bernasconi-Quadroni, D. E. Soltis, P. S.
Soltis, M. Zanis, E. Zimmer, Z. Chen, V. Savolainen, and M. Chase. 2000.
Phylogeny of basal angiosperms: analyses of five genes from three
genomes. International Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement):
S3-S27.

Ray, J. 1703. Methodus plantarum emendata et aucta. Smith and Walford,
London, UK.

Reichenbach, H. G. L. 1827-1829. Dr. Joh. Christ, Moessler\'s Handbuch
der Gewaechskunde, \[ed.\] vols. 2, 3. Hammerich, Altona, Germany.

Renner, S. S. 1999. Circumscription and phylogeny of the Laurales:
evidence from molecular and morphological data. American Journal of
Botany 86: 1301-1315.

Renner, S. S. and A. S. Chanderbali. 2000. What is the relationship
among Hernandiaceae, Lauraceae, and Monimiaceae, and why is this
question so difficult to answer? International Journal of Plant Sciences
161:S109-S119.

Renner, S. S., A. E. Schwarzbach, and L. Lohmann. 1997. Phylogenetic
position and floral function of Siparuna (Siparunaceae: Laurales).
International Journal of Plant Sciences 158:S89-S98.

Ronse De Craene, L. P., P. S. Soltis, and D. E. Soltis. 2003. Evolution
of floral structures in basal angiosperms. International Journal of
Plant Sciences 164 (Supplement): S329-S363.

Sampson, F. B. 2000. The pollen of Takhtajania perrieri (Winteraceae).
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:380-388.

Sauquet, H., J. A. Doyle, T. Scharaschkin, T. Borsch, K. W. Hilu, L. W.
Chatrou, and A. Le Thomas. 2003. Phylogenetic analysis of Magnoliales
and Myristicaceae based on multiple data sets: implications for
character evolution. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 142:
125-186.

Schatz, G. E., P. P. Lowry, and A. Ramisamihantanirina. 1998.
Takhtajania perrieri rediscovered. Nature 391:133-134.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, D. L. Nickrent, L. A. Johnson, W. J. Hahn,
S. B. Hoot, J. A. Sweere, R. K. Kuzoff, K. A. Kron, M. W. Chase, S. M.
Swensen, E. A. Zimmer, S.-M. Chaw, L. J. Gillespie, W. J. Kress, and K.
J. Sytsma. 1997. Angiosperm phylogeny inferred from 18S ribosomal DNA
sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 84: 1-49.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. E. Mort, M. W. Chase, V. Savolainen, S.
B. Hoot, and C. M. Morton. 1998. Infering complex phylogeneis using
parsimony: an empirical approach using three large DNA data sets for
angiosperms. Systematic Biology 47: 32-42.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. W. Chase, M. E. Mort, D. C. Albach, M.
Zanis, V. Savolainen, W. J. Hahn, S. B. Hoot, M. F. Fay, M. Axtell, S.
M. Swensen, L. M. Prince, W. J. Kress, K. C. Nixon, and J. S. Farris.
2000. Angiosperm phylogeny inferred from 18S rDNA, rbcL, and atpB
sequences. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 133: 381-461.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. W. Chase, and P. K. Endress. 2005.
Angiosperm phylogeny and evolution. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates

Soltis, P. S., D. E. Soltis, and M. W. Chase. 1999. Angiosperm phylogeny
inferred from multiple genes as a tool for comparative biology. Nature
402:402-404.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. Soltis, M. J. Zanis, and S. Kim. 2000. Basal
lineages of angiosperms: Relationships and implications for floral
evolution. International Journal of Plant Science161(Supplement):
S97-S107.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. soltis, V. savolainen, P. R. Crane, and T. G.
Barraclough. 2002. Rate heterogeneity among lineages of tracheophytes:
integration of molecular and fossil data and evidence for molecular
living fossils. Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences, USA 99:
4430-4435.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. Soltis, M. W. Chase, P. K. Endress, and P. R.
Crane. 2004. The diversification of flowering plants. In J. Cracraft and
M. J. Donoghue \[eds.\], The tree of life. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.

Sytsma, K. J., and D. A. Baum. 1996. Molecular phylogenies and the
diversification of angiosperms. In D. W. Taylor and L. J. Hickey
\[eds.\], Flowering plant origin, evolution, and phylogeny, 314-340.
Chapman and Hall, New York, USA.

Suh, Y., L. B. Thien, H. E. Reeve and E. A. Zimmer. 1993. Molecular
evolution and phylogenetic implications of internal transcribed spacer
sequences of ribosomal DNA Winteraceae. American Journal of Botany
80:1042-1055.

Takhtajan, A. 1980. Outline of the classification of flowering plants
(Magnoliophyta). Botanical Review 46: 225-359.

Takhtajan, A. 1987. System of Magnoliophyta. Academy of Sciences,
Leningrad, USSR.

Takhtajan, A. 1997. Diversity and classification of flowering plants.
Columbia University Press, New York, USA.

Thorne, R. F. 1974. A phylogenetic classification of the Annoniflorae.
Aliso 8: 147-209.

Thorne, R. F. 1992. Classification and geography of the flowering
plants. Botanical Review 58: 225-348.

Tobe, H. and B. Sampson. 2000. Embryology of Takhtajania (Winteraceae)
and a summary statement of embryological features for the family. Annals
of the Missouri Botanical Garden 87:389-397.

Tucker, S. C., A. W. Douglas, and L. Han-Xing. 1993. Utility of
Ontogenetic and Conventional Characters in Determining Phylogenetic
Relationships of Saururaceae and Piperaceae (Piperales). Systematic
Botany 18:614-641.

Van der Ham, R., and B. J. Van Heuven. 2002. Evolutionary trends in
Winteraceae pollen. Grana 41:4-9.

Vink, W. 1988. Taxonomy in Winteraceae. Taxon 37:691-698.

Vink, W. 1993. Winteraceae. Pages 630-638 in: The Families and Genera of
Vascular Plants. II. Flowering Plants: Dicotyledons, Magnoliid,
Hamamelid and Caryophyllid Families. K. Kubitzki, J. G. Rohwer, and V.
Bittrich, eds. Springer, Berlin.

Walker, J. W., G. J. Breener, and A. G. Walker. 1983. Winteraceaeous
pollen in the Lower Cretaceous of Israel: early evidence of a
magnolialean angiosperm family. Science 220:1273-1275.

Walker, J. W., and A. G. Walker. 1984. Ultrastructure of Lower
Cretaceous angiosperm pollen and the origin and early evolution of
flowering plants. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 71: 464-521.

Wilson, T. K. 1966. The comparative morphology of the Canellaceae. IV.
Floral morphology and conclusions. American Journal of Botany 53:
336-343.

Zanis, M., D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, S. Mathews, and M. J. Donoghue.
2002. The root of the angiosperms revisited. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA 99: 6848-6853.

Zanis, M. J., P. S. Soltis, Y.-L. Qiu, E. Zimmer, and D. E. Soltis.
2003. Phylogenetic analyses and perianth evolution in basal angiosperms.
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 90: 129-150.

##### Title Illustrations

![](asimina_002.jpg)

  ---------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Asimina
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        Sangtae Kim
  Copyright ::            © 2005 [Sangtae Kim](mailto:sangtae@botany.ufl.edu)
  ---------------------
![](AristolochiatrilobataBlanco2685FLAS3.jpg)

  ---------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Aristolochia trilobata
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        Mario Blanco
  Body Part            Flower
  View                 profile
  Copyright ::            © 2005 [Mario Blanco](mailto:mblanco@fllmnh.ufl.edu)
  ---------------------
![](tasstipitatafemalematyas1.jpg)

  -----------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Tasmannia stipitata
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        Matyas Buzgo
  Sex ::                Female
  Body Part            Flowers
  Copyright ::            © 2005 [Matyas Buzgo](ftp://ftp.flmnh.ufl.edu/Public/mbuzgo/MyPage/mbuzgo.htm)
  -----------------------------::::::::::::::::::::::::::
