---
title: Monocotyledons
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Angiosperms
    -   [Amborella trichopoda](Amborella_trichopoda.md)
    -   [magnoliids](magnoliids.md)
    -   [Chloranthaceae](Chloranthaceae.md)
    -   [Ceratophyllaceae](Ceratophyllaceae.md)
    -   Monocotyledons
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Austrobaileyales](Austrobaileyales.md)
    -   [Nymphaeaceae](Nymphaeaceae.md)

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Alismatanae](Alismatanae.md)
    -   [Aranae](Aranae.md)
    -   [Liliales](Liliales.md)
    -   [Asparagales](Asparagales.md)
    -   [Pandanales](Pandanales.md)
    -   [Dioscoreales](Dioscoreales.md)
    -   [Arecanae](Arecanae.md)
    -   [Zingiberanae](Zingiberanae.md)
    -   [Commelinanae](Commelinanae.md)

# Monocotyledons 

[William J. Hahn](#AboutThisPage)

![Amorphophallus](AmorphophallusF_002.jpg)
![](Hosta1.jpg)
![Pandanus](Pandanus.jpg)

Containing group: [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)

### Introduction

The Monocotyledons are one of the most distinctive major lineages of
angiosperms and traditionally have been paired with the Dicotyledons as
the two main groups of flowering plants. Among the monocots are some of
the largest families of angiosperms (such as the orchids with ca. 20,000
species and the grasses with ca. 15,000 species) as well as some of the
most economically important species of plants. Numerous vegetation types
are dominated by monocots including grasslands, palm savannas, sedge
meadows, and cattail marshes.

### Characteristics

The shared, derived character that unites all monocots is the single
cotyledon, a feature first noted by John Ray in 1703. Other features
that are common in monocots but not necessarily unique to or universal
among them are: vascular bundles irregularly distributed in cross
section of the stem, parallel veins in the leaves (mostly in the more
derived groups), and flower parts in multiples of three. Despite the
lack of true secondary growth in monocots, most growth habits are found
in the group including floating and submerged aquatics, lianas, trees,
epiphytes, and forbs of all sizes.

### Relationships of Monocots to other Angiosperms

A singular origin for the monocots is generally accepted with numerous
morphological synapomorphies proposed for the group (Donoghue and Doyle,
1989; Doyle and Donoghue, 1992; Tucker and Douglas, 1996). Additionally,
most molecular analyses of monocots have provided strong support for
their monophyly (Chase, et al., 1993, 1995; Duvall, et al., 1993; Hamby
and Zimmer, 1992).

Relative to other angiosperms, the monocots are most frequently placed
among a group of predominantly herbaceous magnoliid taxa (Lactoridaceae,
Aristolochiaceae, Piperaceae, Sauraraceae, Nymphaeaceae) collectively
referred to as the \"paleoherbs\" (Donoghue and Doyle, 1989). The
specific relationships among these taxa are still unclear but a close
relationship of the monocots with either the woody magnoliid taxa or the
more derived, tricolpate, \"eudicots\" is not supported in any analysis.

The fossil record of the Monocotyledons is old with the first probable
monocot remains dating to the Early Cretaceous. The presence of
morphologically diverse fossils by the Campanian suggests a relatively
rapid radiation into most of the extant major groups early in the course
of monocot evolution (Herendeen and Crane, 1995).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

The terminal taxa in this phylogeny are based on the major groups
recognized and delimited by Dahlgren, et al. (1985) and Thorne (1992a,
b) with several modifications. Although earlier work by Huber (1969,
1977) provided the context for a more explicit analysis of monocot
relationships, Dahlgren and co-workers were the first to utilize
cladistic approaches to the study of monocot phylogeny and their
taxonomy is still the most complete. As such, it has served as the basis
for most recent studies of the monocots (e.g., Rudall, et al, 1995).
Alternate taxonomic systems of Cronquist (1981), Thorne (1992a, b) and
Takhtajan (1980, 1987) are largely congruent with that of Dahlgren, et
al. (1985) but differ in treatment of lilioid and basal monocots. The
systems of Dahlgren and Thorne maintain numerous smaller families in the
Lilianae as opposed to a few relatively large ones and place lilioid
elements at the base of the monocots rather than the Alismatanae and
Aranae.

The phylogenetic hypothesis represented here is based largely on the
rbcL reconstructions of Duvall, et al. (1993a, b) and Chase, et al.
(1995a) with consideration of the morphological studies of Dalhgren, et
al. (1983, 1985) and Stevenson and Loconte (1995; see also Chase, et
al., 1995b) as well as the nrDNA 18S SSU studies of Hamby and Zimmer
(1992) and Bharathan and Zimmer (1995). Resolution within and among
certain subgroups is predominantly based on various works presented in
Rudall, et al. (1995).

The general relationships depicted in this tree are recovered in most
analyses although taxon sampling is not completely comparable from study
to study. Differences in topology concern the nature of the basal
lineages (specifically the position of the alismatid/aroid and the
dioscorealean/melanthioid lineages), placement of certain enigmatic taxa
such as the Cyclanthaceae, Eriocaulaceae, Hanguanaceae, Pandanaceae,
Velloziaceae, and Xyridaceae, and resolution within the Lilianae and
Commelinanae.

While some earlier studies had suggested basal positions for groups such
as the palms (Arecanae), most recent analyses place either the
Alismatanae and Aranae (e.g., Duvall, et al., 1993a, 1993b; Chase, et
al., 1993, 1995), or members of the lilioid orders Dioscoreales (e.g.,
Huber, 1969; Dahlgren et al. 1983, 1985; Stevenson and Loconte, 1995)
and Melanthiales (e.g., Thorne, 1992; Takhtajan, 1969) as sister to the
remainder of the monocots. Much of the difference seen in these two
alternative hypotheses is due to uncertainties over the position of
monocots within the angiosperms and attendant ambiguity in outgroup
choice. Character state homologies are not obvious in many cases and
alternate outgroups provide different character state polarizations. The
current weight of evidence, however, seems to support the
alismatid/aroid hypothesis. An example of this is the trans-spliced
structure of the 4th intron in the mitochondrial gene nad1 shared by all
monocots sampled except Araceae and Alismataceae (Qui & Palmer, 1996).

### References

Bharathan, G & EA Zimmer. 1995. pp 81-107 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Crib, DF
Cutler & CJ Humphries. (eds.) Monocotyledons: systematics and
evolution,. Royal Botanic Garden, Kew.

Chase, M. W. 2004. Monocot relationships: an overview. American Journal
of Botany 91: 1645-1655.

Chase, MW, MR Duval, HG Hills, JG Conran, AV Cox, LE Eguiarte, J
Hartwell, MF Fay, LR Caddick, KM Cameron, & S Hoot. 1995a. Molecular
phylogenetics of Lilianae. pp 109-137 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Crib, DF Cutler
& CJ Humphries (eds.). Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal
Botanic Garden, Kew.

Chase, MW, DW Stevenson, P Wilkin, & PJ Rudall. 1995b. Monocot
systematics: a combined analysis. pp 685-730 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Cribb, DF
Cutler & CJ Humphries (eds.). Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution.
Royal Botanic Garden, Kew.

Cronquist, A 1981. An Integrated System of Classification of the
Flowering Plants. 1262 pp. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

Dahlgren, RMT & HT Clifford. 1982. The Monocotyledons - A Comparative
Study. Academic Press, New York.

Dahlgren, RMT, HT Clifford, & PF Yeo. 1985. The Families of the
Monocotyledons. 520 pp. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Dahlgren, RMT, & F Rassmussen. 1983. Monocotyledon evolution. Characters
and phylolgenetic estimation. Evol. Biol. 16: 255-395.

Donoghue, MJ & JA Doyle. 1989. Phylogenetic analysis of angiosperms and
the relationships of Hamemelidae. pp 17-45 in: PR Crane & S Blackmore
(eds.). Evolution, Systematics, and the Fossil History of the
Hamamelidae vol. 1. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Doyle, JA & MJ Donoghue. 1992. Fossils and seed plant phylogeny
realalyzed. Brittonia 44: 89-106.

Doyle, JA, MJ Donoghue, & EA Zimmer. 1994. Integration of morphological
and rRNA data on the origin of angiosperms. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 81:
419-450.

Duvall, MR, GH Learn, LE Eguiarte, & ME Clegg. 1993a. Phylogenetic
analysis of rbcL sequences identifies Acorus calamus as the primal
extant monocotyledon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90: 4641-4644.

Duvall, MW, MT Clegg, MW Chase, WD Clark, WJ Kress, HG Hills, LE
Eguiarte, JF Smith, BS Gaut, EA Zimmer, GH Learn, Jr. 1993b.
Phylogenetic hypotheses for the monocotyledons constructed from rbcL
sequence data. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 80: 607-619.

Grayum, M 1990. Evolution and phylogeny of the Araceae. Ann. Missouri
Bot. Gard. 77: 628-697.

Hamby, RK & EA Zimmer. 1992. Ribosomal RNA as a phylogenetic tool in
plant systematics. pp. 50-91 in: PS Soltis, DE Soltis, & JJ Doyle (eds)
Molecular Systematics of Plants. Chapman and Hall, New York.

Herendeen, PS, & PR Crane. 1995. The fossil history of the
monocotyledons. pp. 1-21 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Cribb, DF Cutler & CJ
Humphries (eds.). Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal
Botanic Garden, Kew.

Huber, H 1969. Die Samenmerkmale und Verwandtschaftsverhaltnisse der
Liliiflorae. Mitt. Bot. Staatssamml. Munchen 8: 219-538.

Huber, H 1977. The treatment of the monocotyledons in an evolutionary
system of classification. Pl. Syst. Evol., Suppl. 1: 285-298.

Les, DD & RR Haynes. 1995. Systematics of subclass Alismatidae: A
synthesis of approaches. pp 353-377 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Cribb, DF Cutler &
CJ Humphries (eds.). Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal
Botanic Garden, Kew.

Linder, HP & EA Kellogg. 1995. Phylogenetic patterns in the commelinid
clade. pp 473-496 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Cribb, DF Cutler & CJ Humphries
(eds.). Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal Botanic Garden,
Kew.

Loconte, H & DW Stevenson. 1991. Cladistics of the Magnoliidae.
Cladistics 7: 267-296.

Qiu, Y-L & JD Palmer. 1996. Intron evolutionand angiosperm phylogeny.
Amer. J. Bot. 83(6-supplement): 188.

Rudall, PJ, PJ Cribb, DF Cutler & CJ Humphries. (eds.) 1995.
Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal Botanic Garden, Kew.

Stevenson, DW & H Loconte, 1995. Cladistic analysis of monocot families.
pp 543-578 in: PJ Rudall, PJ Cribb, DF Cutler & CJ Humphries (eds.).
Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution. Royal Botanic Garden, Kew.

Takhtahan, A. 1980. Outline of the classification of flowering plants
(Magnoliophyta). Bot. Rev. 46: 225-359.

Takhtajan, A 1987. Systema Magnoliophytorum. Nauka, Leningrad. \[In
Russian\].

Thorne, RF 1992a. Classification and geography of the flowering plants.
Bot. Rev. 58: 225-348.

Thorne, RF 1992b. An updated classification of the flowering plants.
Aliso 13: 365-389.

Tucker, SC & AW Douglas. 1996. Floral structure, development and
relationships of Paleoherbs: Saruma, Cabomba, Lactoris, and selected
Piperales. pp. 141-175 in: DW Taylor & LJ Hickey (eds.), Flowering Plant
Origin, Evolution, & Phylogeny. Chapman & Hall. New York.

##### Title Illustrations

![Amorphophallus](AmorphophallusF.jpg)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Amorphophallus
  Copyright ::         © 1997 [William J. Hahn](mailto:wjh22@georgetown.edu) 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
![Hosta plantaginea](Hosta1_002.jpg)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Hosta plantaginea (Lam.) Asch.
  Copyright ::         © 1997 [William J. Hahn](mailto:wjh22@georgetown.edu) 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
![Pandanus](Pandanus_002.jpg)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Pandanus
  Copyright ::         © 1997 [William J. Hahn](mailto:wjh22@georgetown.edu) 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------