---
title: Angiosperms
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Spermatopsida
    -   [Conifers](Conifers.md)
    -   [Gnetales](Gnetales.md)
    -   Angiosperms

-   »
    -   Subgroups
    -   [Amborella trichopoda](Amborella_trichopoda.md)
    -   [magnoliids](magnoliids.md)
    -   [Chloranthaceae](Chloranthaceae.md)
    -   [Ceratophyllaceae](Ceratophyllaceae.md)
    -   [Monocotyledons](Monocotyledons.md)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Austrobaileyales](Austrobaileyales.md)
    -   [Nymphaeaceae](Nymphaeaceae.md)

# Angiosperms

## Flowering Plants 

[Pam Soltis, Doug Soltis, and Christine Edwards](#AboutThisPage)

![Nymphaea water lilies](1744waterlilies_002.jpg)
![](sunflowersk5751-1_002.jpg)
![](13077acacia_002.jpg)

Relationships after Qiu et al. (1999, 2000), P. Soltis et al. (1999), D.
E. Soltis et al. (2000), Zanis et al. (2002) and Hilu et al. (2003).

Containing group: [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [Angiosperm Phylogeny     Website](http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/research/APweb/welcome.html). P. F.
    Stevens, Missouri Botanical Garden.
-   [Deep Time Project: A Comprehensive Phylogenetic Tree of Living and     Fossil Angiosperms](http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu./deeptime/). Florida
    Museum of Natural History.
-   [Treezilla (500-taxon rbcL     Analyses)](http://green.harvard.edu/%7Erice/treezilla). Ken Rice,
    Michael Donoghue, Dick Olmstead
-   [The Families of Flowering     Plants](http://biodiversity.uno.edu/delta/angio/index.htm). L.
    Watson and M. J. Dallwitz.
-   [Images and Descriptions of Flowering Plant Families (as treated by     Arthur     Cronquist)](http://www.botany.hawaii.edu/faculty/carr/fpfamilies.htm).
    University of Hawaii Botany Department.
-   [Flowering Plant     Gateway](http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/FLORA/newgate/cronang.htm). Hugh
    Wilson, Texas A&M Bioinformatics Working Group.
-   [Classification of Flowering     Plants](http://www.systbot.uu.se/classification/overview.html). Kåre
    Bremer, Birgitta Bremer & Mats Thulin, Uppsala University.
-   [Thonner\'s analytical key to the families of flowering     plants](http://home.iae.nl/users/linea/index.html)
-   [The Virtual Flower](http://128.118.180.140/fgp/index.html). Floral
    Genome Project (FGP).
-   [Oldest Known Flowering Plants Identified By     Genes](http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/1999/12.16/angiosperms.html).
    1999 Harvard Gazette article.
-   [Solving Charles Darwin\'s \"Abominable     Mystery\"](http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2001/ast17apr_1.htm?list118443).
    Scientists are using chemical fossils to hunt down one of our
    planet\'s most vexing missing links \-- the first-ever flowering
    plant. 2001 Science @ NASA article.
-   [Paleobotany: Angiosperm     Evolution](http://www.monmouth.com/%7Ebcornet/paleobot.htm). Bruce
    Cornet.
-   [Andean Botanical Information System](http://www.sacha.org/main.htm)
-   [Relationships of Parasitic Flowering     Plants](http://www.science.siu.edu/parasitic-plants/Relation-Flowering.html).
    Parasitic Plant Connection. Dan Nickrent, Southern Illinois
    University at Carbondale.

### Introduction

The angiosperms, or flowering plants, are one of the major groups of
extant seed plants and arguably the most diverse major extant plant
group on the planet, with at least 260,000 living species classified in
453 families (Judd et al., 2002; APG II, 2003; Soltis et al., 2005).
They occupy every habitat on Earth except extreme environments such as
the highest mountaintops, the regions immediately surrounding the poles,
and the deepest oceans. They live as epiphytes (i.e., living on other
plants), as floating and rooted aquatics in both freshwater and marine
habitats, and as terrestrial plants that vary tremendously in size,
longevity, and overall form. They can be small herbs, parasitic plants,
shrubs, vines, lianas, or giant trees. There is a huge amount of
diversity in chemistry (often as a defense against herbivores),
reproductive morphology, and genome size and organization that is
unparalleled in other members of the Plant Kingdom. Furthermore,
angiosperms are crucial for human existence; the vast majority of the
world\'s crops are angiosperms, as are most natural clothing fibers.
Angiosperms are also sources for other important resources such as
medicine and timber.

### Characteristics

Despite their diversity, angiosperms are clearly united by a suite of
synapomorphies (i.e., shared, derived features) including 1) ovules that
are enclosed within a carpel, that is, a structure that is made up of an
ovary, which encloses the ovules, and the stigma, a structure where
pollen germination takes place, 2) double fertilization, which leads to
the formation of an endosperm (a nutritive tissue within the seed that
feeds the developing plant embryo), 3) stamens with two pairs of pollen
sacs, 4) features of gametophyte structure and development, and 5)
phloem tissue composed of sieve tubes and companion cells (see Doyle and
Donoghue, 1986; Judd et al. 2002; P. Soltis et al., 2004; and D. Soltis
et al., 2005, for further discussion). All available evidence strongly
rejects hypotheses of more than one evolutionary origin of extant
angiosperms.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

#### ***Amborella* and the root of the angiosperm evolutionary tree**

Most analyses of the past five years concur in placing the monotypic
*Amborella* as the sister to all other extant angiosperms, although some
analyses suggest *Amborella* plus water lilies may occupy this pivotal
position (see below). *Amborella trichopoda*, endemic to cloud forests
of New Caledonia, was described in the mid-nineteenth century (Baillon,
1869) and has since been classified with various groups of basal
angiosperms, most often with Laurales (e.g., Cronquist, 1981), a group
of magnoliids (see below). However, *Amborella* lacks those features
considered to be synapomorphies for Laurales (Doyle and Endress, 2000;
see Laurales later) and clearly differs from most Laurales in having
spirally arranged floral organs (except perhaps the carpels; M. Buzgo et
al., University of Florida, unpublished data), rather than the whorled
arrangement typical of most Laurales (see studies of floral morphology
and development by Endress and Igersheim, 2000a; Posluszny and
Tomlinson, 2003; Buzgo et al., 2004). *Amborella* has carpels that are
closed only by secretion, rather than by fused tissue as in most
angiosperms (Endress and Igersheim, 2000b)--a feature that may represent
a plesiomorphy (i.e., ancestral feature) for the angiosperms. Features
that unify all extant angiosperms except *Amborella* include vessels
(Judd et al., 2002; but see Feild et al., 2000; Doyle and Endress, 2001)
and pollen grains with a reticulate tectum (Doyle and Endress, 2001).
Synapomorphies for all extant angiosperms except *Amborella* and
Nymphaeaceae (sensu APG II, 2003) include ethereal oil cells--common
throughout basal angiosperms--and columellate pollen grains with a
perforate tectum (Doyle and Endress, 2001).

![ ](amborella.jpg)

Photo of *Amborella trichopoda* (Amborellaceae; photo © Sangtae Kim).

The placement of *Amborella* as sister to all other angiosperms is
supported by nearly all multigene analyses of basal angiosperms,
including evidence from all three plant genomes (e.g., P. Soltis et al.,
1999; Qiu et al., 1999; Mathews and Donoghue, 1999, 2000; Parkinson et
al., 1999; Graham and Olmstead, 2000; Graham et al., 2000; D. Soltis et
al., 2000; Magallon and Sanderson, 2002; Zanis et al., 2002; see also
Nickerson and Drouin, 2004). A few studies have found alternative
rootings, using either different genes or different methods of analysis.
For example, *Amborella* + Nymphaeaceae (e.g. Barkman et al., 2000; P.
Soltis et al., 2000; Kim et al., 2004a) or Nymphaeaceae alone (e.g.,
Parkinson et al., 1999; Graham and Olmstead, 2000, with partial sampling
of Nymphaeaceae; Mathews and Donoghue, 2000) have occasionally been
reported as sister to all other angiosperms. However, statistical
analyses of these alternative rootings using a data set of up to 11
genes generally favor the tree with *Amborella* as sister to the rest,
although the *Amborella* + Nymphaeaceae tree could not always be
rejected (Zanis et al., 2002).

Another alternative, which conflicts with all molecular analyses of
angiosperms with dense taxon sampling, is based on a selection of 61
genes from the totally sequenced plastid genomes of 13 plant species
(Goremykin et al., 2003). This data set placed the monocots (represented
by only three grasses--rice, maize, and wheat) as the sister to all
other extant angiosperms, while *Amborella* was sister to *Calycanthus*
of Laurales, a position consistent with the original description of
*Amborella*, but clearly at odds with other aspects of morphology (see
Laurales section). Goremykin et al. (2003) attributed their results to
the increased character sampling (30,017 nucleotides in their aligned
matrix) in their study relative to other analyses that included fewer
genes but many more taxa. However, further analyses of a data set of
three genes and nearly equivalent taxon sampling as used by Goremykin et
al. indicated that the \"monocots-basal\" topology is an artifact of
limited taxon sampling (D. Soltis and Soltis, 2004; Soltis et al.,
2004). The recent work of Stefanovic et al. (2005) further indicates
that the results of Goremykin et al. reflect poor taxon sampling.
Stefanovic et al. added the nearly complete plastid sequence of *Acorus*
to the Goremykin et al. data set, and this simple addition resulted in
the \"*Amborella*-basal\" topology.

#### **The basal angiosperms**

The basal angiosperms represent a grade that includes the following
groups: Amborellaceae (discussed above), Nymphaeaceae (sensu APG II,
2003), Austrobaileyales, Ceratophyllaceae, Chloranthaceae, magnoliids,
and monocots (although not all investigators choose to consider monocots
basal angiosperms). The evolutionary relationships of these groups are
discussed below.

![ ](illicium2copy3.jpg)

Photos of *Nuphar japonica* sp. (Nymphaeaceae; photo © Sangtae Kim),
*Austrobaileya* sp. (Austrobaileyales; photo © Peter Endress) and
*Illicium floridanum* (Schisandraceae sensu APG II (2003); photo © Doug
Soltis).

***Nymphaeaceae.*** The phylogenetic position of Nymphaeaceae as one of
the two basalmost (or oldest diverging) lineages of extant angiosperms
is strongly supported by nearly all molecular analyses. This clade of
eight aquatic genera has a worldwide distribution, consistent with the
ancient age of this lineage based on the fossil record. However, despite
the ancient origins of this group, molecular analyses indicate that most
extant genera of Nympheaceae have relatively recent origins (Yoo et al.
2005).

***Austrobaileyales.*** The positions of Amborellaceae and Nymphaeaceae
as successive sisters to the rest of the angiosperms are followed, in
turn, by Austrobaileyales. Austrobaileyales are a small clade that
comprises Austrobaileyaceae (*Austrobaileya*) and Trimeniaceae
(*Trimenia*) from Australasia plus a broadly defined Schisandraceae
(sensu APG II, 2003, i.e., *Schisandra*, *Kadsura*, and *Illicium*; Qiu
et al., 1999; Renner, 1999; Savolainen et al., 2000a, b; P. Soltis et
al., 1999; D. Soltis et al., 2000). Although the traditional Illiciaceae
and Schisandraceae have typically been considered to be closely related,
a relationship between these taxa and *Austrobaileya* and *Trimenia* had
not been suspected. No morphological characteristics have been
identified that unify this group, despite the strong molecular support
for its monophyly.

#### **Relationships among Ceratophyllaceae, monocots, Chloranthaceae, magnoliids, and eudicots**

Resolution and support for relationships among Ceratophyllaceae,
monocots, Chloranthaceae, magnoliids, and eudicots are poor.
Individually, each lineage is well supported, and both the fossil record
and molecular-based trees identify these lineages as ancient. However,
relationships among them remain unclear. It is clear, however, that
angiosperms do not fall into two major groups that correspond to
monocots (Liliopsida) and dicots (Magnoliopsida) of most traditional
classification systems such as Cronquist (1981), Takhtajan (1997), and
their predecessors. Although monocots clearly form a strongly supported
group, dicots in the traditional sense do not: most are found in the
eudicot clade, but the remaining nonmonocot basal branches (i.e.,
Amborellaceae, Nymphaeaceae, Austrobaileyales, Ceratophyllaceae,
Chloranthaceae, magnoliids) were also \"traditional\" dicots. It was
long suspected that the \"dicots\" as traditionally recognized
represents multiple evolutionary lineages, and the nonmonophyly of
dicots based on molecular data precludes their recognition in current
classifications (e.g., APG II, 2003). Thus, the concept of \"dicot\"
should be abandoned in favor of eudicots.

![ ](magnoliagrandiflora.jpg)

Photos of *Ceratophyllum demersum* (Ceratophyllaceae; photo © Peter
Endress), *Sarcandra chloranthoides* (Chloranthaceae; photo © Peter
Endress) and *Magnolia grandiflora* (Magnoliaceae; photo © Sangtae Kim)

***Monocots.*** While dicots are not a valid group, the monocots indeed
are a distinct group within the angiosperms. Ray (1703) first identified
the monocots as a group, based largely on their possession of a single
cotyledon. Nonmolecular phylogenetic studies of monocots (Doyle and
Donoghue, 1992; Donoghue and Doyle, 1989; Loconte and Stevenson, 1991)
support this grouping; these studies have identified 13 putative
synapomorphies for the monocots, including, among others, a single
cotyledon, parallel-veined leaves, sieve cell plastids with several
cuneate protein crystals, scattered vascular bundles in the stem, and an
adventitious root system. An often-overlooked synapomorphy for monocots
is their sympodial growth; although there are other angiosperms with
sympodial growth, monocots are nearly exclusively so. These
synapomorphies are covered in detail by Chase (2004; see also Judd et
al., 2002; D. Soltis et al., 2005). In some analyses the monocots appear
as the sister to Ceratophyllaceae, with the clade of monocots +
Ceratophyllaceae sister to Chloranthaceae + magnoliids + eudicots (e.g.,
Zanis et al., 2002; Davies et al., 2004). However, relationships of
monocots are unclear and further work is needed to assess the validity
of their relationships.

***Ceratophyllaceae.*** Ceratophyllaceae (*Ceratophyllum*) had the
distinction of appearing as the sister to all other angiosperms in the
first large molecular phylogenetic analysis based on *rbcL* (Chase et
al., 1993). The aquatic habit and simple flowers seemed at odds with
most hypotheses about the earliest angiosperms, although *Ceratophyllum*
has a long fossil record, going back at least 125 mya (Dilcher, 1989).
Subsequent analyses demonstrated that this placement was unique to the
*rbcL* data set. Our current understanding of the relationship of
*Ceratophyllum* to other angiosperms, based on evidence from many other
genes, is still not clear although it may be related to the monocots
(see Monocots above).

***Chloranthaceae.*** Chloranthaceae, with their small, simple flowers,
have an extensive fossil record, dating back 125 my (e.g., Couper, 1958;
Walker and Walker, 1984; Friis et al., 2000; Doyle et al., 2004; Eklund
et al., 2004). However, although the origins of the family are ancient,
most extant genera are relatively young in age (Zhang and Renner, 2003).
Chloranthaceae are clearly an isolated lineage separate from the
magnoliid clade (Fig. 2), but their phylogenetic position remains
uncertain. In some analyses (e.g., Zanis et al., 2002; Davies et al.,
2004), they are sister to a clade of magnoliids + eudicots, albeit with
weak support.

***Magnoliids.*** The magnoliid clade comprises most of those lineages
typically referred to as \"primitive angiosperms\" in earlier works
(e.g., Cronquist, 1981, 1988; Stebbins, 1974; Takhtajan, 1997). Although
the component families of the magnoliid clade were loosely associated in
previous classifications, for example, as Cronquist\'s (1981) subclass
Magnoliidae, relationships among the families were not clear. In
addition, Magnoliidae contained groups that are not part of the
magnoliid clade as recognized by phylogenetic analyses. Reconstructing
relationships within this clade is challenging, given the age of the
group (some putative members, such as *Archaeanthus*, Dilcher and Crane,
1984, date to the early Cretaceous) and presumably high levels of
extinction. Although the major lineages of the magnoliid clade were
identified as well-supported clades in earlier studies (e.g., P. Soltis
et al., 1999), composition and interrelationships of the magnoliid clade
did not become clear until data sets of at least five genes for a broad
sample of taxa were assembled to address these problems (e.g., Qiu et
al., 1999, 2000; Zanis et al., 2002). Some phylogenetic analyses weakly
support a grouping of magnoliids as sister to the eudicots, although
more data are necessary to clarify this relationship.

***Eudicots.*** Eudicots, a clade strongly supported by molecular data,
comprise the bulk of angiosperm species (approximately 75%; Drinnan et
al., 1994). This large clade is supported by a single morphological
synapomorphy--triaperturate pollen. This pollen type is unique to the
eudicots, and while not all eudicots have triaperturate pollen due to
subsequent changes in pollen structure, triaperturate pollen is clearly
distinct from the uniaperturate pollen of basal angiosperms, monocots,
and all other seed plants, allowing easy assignment of fossil pollen to
the eudicots. The fossil pollen record indicates that the eudicots
appeared 125 mya, shortly after the origin of the angiosperms
themselves. The extensive fossil pollen collections worldwide, coupled
with solid dates, make it unlikely that the eudicots arose much before
this time point.

### The Fossil Record

The oldest unambiguous angiosperm fossil extends back at least to the
early Cretaceous, conservatively around 132 million years ago (mya) (see
Crane et al., 2004). Floral size, structure, and organization in early
angiosperms varied tremendously, ranging from small (i.e., \<1 cm in
diameter) flowers of fossil Chloranthaceae and many other lineages
(reviewed in Friis et al., 2000), to the large, Magnolia-like flowers of
*Archaeanthus* (Dilcher and Crane, 1984). However, some early fossils,
such as *Archaefructus* (Sun et al. 2002), appear to have no close
extant relatives. The floral diversity in the fossil record is
consistent with an early radiation of angiosperms and a diversification
in floral form (e.g., Friis et al., 2000).

### Age Estimates for the Angiosperms

Initial attempts to estimate the age of the angiosperms and the timing
of important divergences based on molecular data span a wide time range
(ranging from \~125 to \> 400 mya) and many disagree with dates
determined from the fossil record (see Sanderson and Doyle, 2001; P.
Soltis et al. 2002; Sanderson et al., 2004; Bell et al., 2005). However,
more recent efforts to date the origin of the angiosperms using
molecular data and improved dating methods have converged on estimates
between 180-140 mya, predating the dates inferred from the fossil record
by between 45 to 5 million years (Sanderson et al., 2004; Bell et al.,
2005). Estimated ages for specific angiosperm clades using molecular
estimates are also generally older than inferences from the fossil
record (e.g., Wikström et al., 2001, compared with Magallon et al.,
1999), but these discrepancies are generally small. Work in the future
will likely focus on further reconciliation of age estimates inferred
from fossils and molecular data. For example, given the numerous diverse
fossils reported from as early as 115-125 mya, perhaps the earliest
angiosperms were older than the estimate from the fossil record of 132
mya. Conversely, molecular methods tend to overestimate ages
(Rodríguez-Trelles et al., 2002), so refinement of dating approaches is
needed to compensate for this bias.

### References

Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG). 1998. An ordinal classification for
the families of flowering plants. Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 85: 531-553.

Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG II). 2003. An update of the Angiosperm
Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering
plants: APG II. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 141: 399-436.

Baillon, H. 1869. Histoires des plantes, vol. 1. L. Hachette & Cie.
Paris, France.

Barkman, T. J., G. Chenery, J. R. Mcneal, J. Lyons-Weiler, and C. W.
Depamphilis. 2000. Independent and combined analyses of sequences from
all three genomic compartments converge on the root of flowering plant
phylogeny. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 97:
13166-13171.

Barkman, T. J., S.-H. Lim, K. M. Salleh, and J., Nais. 2004.
Mitochondrial DNA sequences reveal the photosynthetic relatives of
Rafflesia, the world\'s largest flower. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA 101: 787-792.

Barraclough, T. G. and V. Savolainen. 2001. Evolutionary rates and
species diversity in flowering plants. Evolution 55:677-683.

Basinger, J., and D. L. Dilcher. 1984. Ancient bisexual flowers. Science
224: 511-513.

Behnke, H.-D. 1969. Die Siebrohren-Plastiden bei Monocotlen.
Naturwissenschaften 55: 140-141.

Beck, C. B., ed. 1976. Origin and Early Evolution of Angiosperms.
Columbia University Press, New York.

Bell, C. D., D. E. Soltis, and P. S. Soltis. 2005. The age of the
Angiosperms: a molecular timescale without a clock. Evolution, 59(6).

Bharathan, G., and E. A. Zimmer. 1995. Early branching events in
monocotyledons--partial 18S ribosomal DNA sequence analysis. In P. J.
Rudall, P. J. Cribb, D. F. Cutler, and C. J. Humphries \[eds.\],
Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution, 81-107. Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, London, UK.

Borsch, T., K. W. Hilu, D. Quandt, V. Wilde, C. Neinhuis, and W.
Barthlott. 2003. Non-coding plastid trnT-trnF sequences reveal a highly
supported phylogeny of basal angiosperms. Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 15: 558-567.

Braun, A. 1864. Uebersicht der naturlichen Systems nach der Anordnung
derselben. In P. Ascherson \[ed.\], Flora der Provinz Brandenburg, der
Altmark und des Herzogthums Magdeburg, vol. 1, 22-67. Hirschwald,
Berlin, Germany.

Bremer, K. 2000. Early Cretaceous lineages of monocot flowering plants.
Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences, USA 97: 4707-4711.

Bremer, K., A. Backlund, B. Sennblad, U. Swenson, K. Andreasen, M.
Hjertson, J. Lundberg, M. Backlund, and B. Bremer. 2001. A phylogenetic
analysis of 100+ genera and 50+ families of euasterids based on
morphological and molecular data with notes on possible higher level
morphological synapomorphies. Plant Systematics and Evolution 229:
137-169.

Burleigh, G. G., and S. Mathews. 2004. Phylogenetic signal in nucleotide
data from seed plants: implications for resolving the seed plant tree of
life. American. Journal of Botany. 91: 1599-1613

Chase, M. W., and V. A. Albert. 1998. A perspective on the contribution
of plastid rbcL DNA sequences to angiosperm phylogenetics. In D. E.
Soltis, P. S. Soltis, and J. J. Doyle \[eds.\], Molecular systematics of
plants, vol. 2: DNA sequencing, 488-507. Kluwer, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Chase, M. W., D. E. Soltis, R. G. Olmstead, D. Morgan, D. H. Les, B. D.
Mishler, M. R. Duvall, R. A. Price, H. G. Hills, Y.-L. Qiu, K. A. Kron,
J. H. Rettig, E. Conti, J. D. Palmer, J. R. Manhart, K. J. Sytsma, H. J.
Michaels, W. J. Kress, K. G. Karol, W. D. Clark, M. Hedren, B. S. Gaut,
R. K. Jansen, K.-J. Kim, C. F. Wimpee, J. F. Smith, G. R. Furnier, S. H.
Strauss, Q.-Y. Xiang, G. M. Plunkett, P. S. Soltis, S. M. Swensen, S. E.
Williams, P. A. Gadek, C. J. Quinn, L. E. Eguiarte, E. Golenberg, G. H.
Learn, Jr., S. W. Graham, S. C. H. Barrett, S. Dayanandan, and V. A.
Albert. 1993. Phylogenetics of seed plants: an analysis of nucleotide
sequences from the plastid gene rbcL. Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 80: 528-580.

Chase, M. W., D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, P. J. Rudall, M. F. Fay, W. H.
Hahn, S. Sullivan, J. Joseph, T. Givnish, K. J. Sytsma, and J. C. Pires.
2000. Higher-level systematics of the monocotyledons: An assessment of
current knowledge and a new classification. In K. L. Wilson and D. A.
Morrison \[eds.\], Monocots systematics and evolution, 3-16. CSIRO,
Melbourne, Australia.

Chase, M. W., M. F. Fay, D. S. Devey, O. Maurin, J. Davies, Y. Pillon,
G. Petersen, O. Seberg, M. N. Tamura, C. B. Asmussen, K. Hilu, T.
Borsch, J. I. Davis, D. W. Stevenson, J. C. Pires, T. J. Givnish, K. J.
Sytsma, and S. W. Graham. Multi-gene analyses of monocot relationships:
a summary. In In J. T. Columbus, E. A. Friar, C. W. Hamilton, J. M.
Porter, L. M. Prince, and M. G. Simpson \[eds.\]. Monocots: Comparative
biology and evolution. 2 vols. Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden,
Claremont, California, USA, in press.

Couper, R. A. 1958. British Mesozoic microspores and pollen grains: a
systematic and stratigraphic study. Palaeontographica. Abteilung B,
Paläophytologie 103: 75-179.

Crane, P. R., M. J. Donoghue, J. A. Doyle and E. M. Friis. 1989.
Angiosperm origins. Nature 342:131.

Crane, P. R., E. M. Friis, and K.R. Pedersen. 1995. The origin and early
diversification of angiosperms. Nature 374: 27-33.

Crane, P. R. and S. Lidgard. 1989. Angiosperm diversification and
paleolatitudinal gradients in Cretaceous floristic diversity. Science
246:675-678.

Crepet, W., and K. Nixon. 1998. Fossil Clusiaceae from the Late
Cretaceous (Turonian) of New Jersey and implications regarding the
history of bee pollination. American Journal of Botany 85: 1122-1133.

Cronquist, A. 1981. An integrated system of classification of flowering
plants. Columbia University Press, New York, USA.

Cronquist, A. 1988. The evolution and classification of flowering
plants, 2nd ed. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York, USA.

Dahlgren, R. 1980. A revised system of classification of the
angiosperms. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 80: 91-124.

Dahlgren, R., H. Clifford, and P. Yeo. 1985. The families of the
monocotyledons: structure, evolution and taxonomy. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Germany.

Davies, T. J., T. G. Barraclough, M. W. Chase, P. S. Soltis, D. E.
Soltis, And V. Savolainen. 2004. Darwin\'s abominable mystery: insights
from a supertree of the angiosperms. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA 101: 1904-1909.

Davis, C. C., and M. W. Chase. 2004. Elatinaceae are sister to
Malpighiaceae; Peridiscaceae belong to Saxifragales. American Journal of
Botany 91: 262-273.

Davis, J. I., M. P. Simmons, D. W. Stevenson, and J. F. Wendel. 1998.
Data decisiveness, data quality, and incongruence in phylogenetic
analysis: an example from the monocotyledons using mitochondrial atpA
sequences. Systematic Biology 47: 282-310.

Davis, J. I., D. W. Stevenson, G. Petersen, O. Seberg, L. M. Campbell,
J. V. Freudenstein, D. H. Goldman, C. R. Hardy, F. A. Michelangeli, M.
P. Simmons, C. D. Specht, F. Vergara-Silva, and M. A. Gandolfo. A
phylogeny of the monocots, as inferred from rbcL and atpA sequence
variation. Systematic Botany: in press.

De Jussieu, A. L. 1789. Genera plantarum secundum ordines naturals
disposita. Heissant and Barrois, Paris, France.

Dilcher, D. L. 1989. The occurrence of fruits with affinities to
Ceratophyllaceae in lower and mid-Cretaceous sediments. American Journal
of Botany 76: 162.

Dilcher, D. L., and Crane, P. R. 1984. Archaeanthus: an early angiosperm
from the Cenomanian of the western interior of North America. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 71: 351-383.

Donoghue, M. J., and J. A. Doyle. 1989. Phylogenetic studies of seed
plants and angiosperms based on morphological characters. In K. Bremer
and H. Jörnvall \[eds.\], The hierarchy of life: molecules and
morphology in phylogenetic studies, 181-193. Elsevier Science
Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Douglas, A., and S. C. Tucker. 1996. Comparative floral ontogenies among
Persoonioideae including Bellendena (Proteaceae). American Journal of
Botany 83: 1528-1555.

Doyle, J. A. 1998. Phylogeny of vascular plants. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 29:567-599.

Doyle, J. A., and M. J. Donoghue. 1986. Seed plant phylogeny and the
origin of the angiosperms: an experimental cladistic approach. Botanical
Review 52: 321-431.

Doyle, J. A., and M. J. Donoghue. 1992. Fossils and seed plant phylogeny
reanalzyed. Brittonia 44: 89-106.

Doyle, J. A. and M. J. Donoghue. 1993. Phylogenies and angiosperm
diversification. Paleobiology 19:141-167.

Doyle, J. A., M. J. Donoghue and E. A. Zimmer. 1994. Integration of
morphological and rRNA data on the origin of angiosperms. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 81:419-450.

Doyle, J. A., and P. K. Endress. 2000. Morphological phylogenetic
analyses of basal angiosperms: comparison and combination with molecular
data. International Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement):
S121-S153.

Doyle, J. A., H. Eklund, and P. S. Herendeen. 2003. Floral evolution in
Chloranthaceae: implications of a morphological phylogenetic analysis.
International Journal of Plant Sciences 164 (Supplement): S365-S382.

Drinnan, A. N., P. R. Crane, and S. B. Hoot. 1994. Patterns of floral
evolution in the early diversification of non-magnoliid dicotyledons
(eudicots). Plant Systematics and Evolution 8 (Supplement): 93-122.

Duvall, M. R., G. H. Learn, L. E. Eguiarte, and M. T. Clegg. 1993.
Phylogenetic analysis of rbcL sequences identifies Acorus calamus as the
primal extant monocotyledon. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA 90: 4611-4644.

Eichler, A. 1875-1878. Blüthendiagramme I/II. Engelmann, Leipzig,
Germany.

Eklund, H., J. A. Doyle, and P. S. Herendeen. 2004. Morphological
phylogenetic analysis of living and fossil Chloranthaceae. International
Journal of Plant Sciences 165: 107-151.

Endress, P. K. 1986. Reproductive structures and phylogenetic
significance of eztant primitive angiosperms. Plant Systematic Evolution
152: 1-28.

Endress, P. K. 2001. The flowers in extant basal angiosperms and
inferences on ancestral flowers. International Journal of Plant Sciences
162: 1111-1140.

Endress, P. K., and A. Igersheim. 1997. Gynoecium diversity and
systematics of the Laurales. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society
125: 93-168.

Endress, P. K., and A. Igersheim. 2000a. The reproductive structures of
the basal angiosperm Amborella trichopoda (Amborellaceae). International
Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement): S237-S248.

Endress, P. K., and A. Igersheim. 2000b. Gynoecium structure and
evolution in basal angiosperms. International Journal of Plant Sciences
161 (Supplement): S211-S223.

Feild, T. S., M. A. Zweiniecki, T. Brodribb, T. Jaffre, M. J. Donoghue,
and N. M. Holbrook. 2000. Structure and function of tracheary elements
in Amborella trichopoda. International Journal of Plant Sciences 161:
705-712.

Friis, E. M., K. R. Pedersen, and P. R. Crane. 2000. Reproductive
structure and organization of basal angiosperms from the early
Cretaceous (Barremian or Aptian) of western Portugal. International
Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement): S169-S182.

Friis, E. M., K. R. Pedersen, and P. R. Crane. 2001. Fossil evidence of
water lilies in the Early Cretaceous. Nature 410:357-360.

Friis, E. M., J. A. Doyle, P. K. Endress, and Q. Leng. 2003.
Archaefructus--angiosperm precursor or specialized early angiosperm?
Trends in Plant Science 8: 369-373.

Gandolfo, M. A., K. C. Nixon, and W. L. Crepet. 2002. Triuridaceae
fossil flowers from the Upper Cretaceous of New Jersey. American Journal
of Botany 89: 1940-1957.

Gandolfo, M. A., K. C. Nixon, and W. L. Crepet. 2004. Cretaceous flowers
of Nymphaeaceae and implications for complex insect entrapment
pollinations mechanisms in early Angiosperms. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA: online.

Gaut, B. S., S. V. Muse, W. D. Clark, and M. T. Clegg. 1992. Relative
rates of nucleotide substitution at the rbcL locus of monocotyledonous
plants. Journal of Molecular Evolution 35: 292-303.

Givnish, T. J., and K. J. Sytsma. 1997. Consistency, characters, and the
likelihood of correct phylogenetic inference. Molecular Phylogenetics
and Evolution 7: 320-333.

Givnish, T. J., J. C. Pires, S. W. Graham, M. A. McPherson, L. M.
Prince, T. B. Patterson, H. S. Rai, E. H. Roalson, T. M. Evans, W. J.
Hahn, K. C. Millam, A. W Meerow, M. Molvray, P. J. Kores, H. E.
O\'Brien, J. C. Hall, W. J. Kress, and K. J. Sytsma. Phylogenetic
relationships of monocots based on the highly informative plastid gene
ndhF: evidence for widespread converted convergence. In In J. T.
Columbus, E. A. Friar, C. W. Hamilton, J. M. Porter, L. M. Prince, and
M. G. Simpson \[eds.\]. Monocots: Comparative biology and evolution. 2
vols. Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden, Claremont, California, USA, in
press.

Goremykin, V., V. K. I. Hirsch-Ernst, S. Wölfl, and F. H. Hellwig. 2003.
Analysis of the Amborella trichopoda chloroplast genome sequence
suggests that Amborella is not a basal angiosperm. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 20: 1499-1505.

Gottsberger, G. 1977. Some aspects of beetle pollination in the
evolution of flowering plants. Plant Systematics and Evolution 1:
211-226.

Gottsberger, G. 1988. The reproductive biology of primitive angiosperms.
Taxon 37: 630-643.

Graham, S. W., and R. G. Olmstead. 2000. Utility of 17 chloroplast genes
for inferring the phylogeny of the basal angiosperms. American Journal
of Botany 87: 1712-1730.

Graham, S. W., P. A. Reeves, A. C. E. Burns, and R. G. Olmstead. 2000.
Microstructural changes in noncoding chloroplast DNA: interpretation,
evolution, and utility of indels and inversions in basal angiosperm
phylogenetic inference. International Journal of Plant Sciences 161
(Supplement): S83-S96.

Heckman, D. S., D. M. Geiser, B. R. Eidell, R. L. Stauffer, N. L.
Kardos, and S. B. Hedges. 2001. Molecular evidence for the early
colonization of land by fungi and plants. Science 293: 1129-1133.

Heywood, V. 1993. Flowering plants of the world. B.T. Batsford Ltd.,
London, UK.

Hickey, L. J., and A. D. Wolfe. 1975. The bases of angiosperm phylogeny:
vegetative morphology. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 62:
538-589.

Hillis, D. M. 1996. Inferring complex phylogenies. Nature 383: 130.

Hilu, K. W., T. Borsch, K. Muller, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, V.
Savolainen, M. Chase, M. Powell, L. Alice, R. Evans, H. Sauquet, C.
Neinhuis, T. Slotta, J. Rohwer, and L. Chatrou. 2003. Inference of
angiosperm phylogeny based on matK sequence information. American
Journal of Botany 90: 1758-1776.

Hoot, S. B., S. Magallón, and P. R. Crane. 1999. Phylogeny of basal
eudicots based on three molecular data sets: atpB, rbcL, and 18S nuclear
ribosomal DNA sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 86:
1-32.

Hufford, L. 1992. Rosidae and their relationships to other nonmagnoliid
dicotyledons: A phylogenetic analysis using morphological and chemical
data. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 79: 218-248.

Igersheim, A. and P. K. Endress. 1998. Gynoecium diversity and
systematics of the paleoherbs. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society
127:289-370.

Judd, W. S., C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, and M. J.
Donoghue. 2002. Plant systematics: a phylogenetic approach. Sinauer
Associates, Inc., Sunderland, Massachusetts, USA.

Kallersjo, M., J. S. Farris, M. W. Chase, B. Bremer, M. F. Fay, C. J.
Humphries, G. Pedersen, O. Seberg, and K. Bremer. 1998. Simultaneous
parsimony jackknife analysis of 2538 rbcL DNA sequences reveals support
for major clades of green plants, land plants, seed plants and flowering
plants. Plant Systematics and Evolution 213:259-287.

Kim, S., V. A. Albert, M.-J. Yoo, J. S. Farris, M. Zanis, P. S. Soltis,
and D. E. Soltis. 2004a. Pre-angiosperm duplication of floral genes and
regulatory tinkering at the base of flowering plants. American Journal
of Botany: in press.

Kim, S., D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, M. J. Zanis, and Y. Suh. 2004b.
Phylogenetic relationships among early-diverging eudicots based on four
genes: were the eudicots ancestrally woody? Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 31: 16-30.

Kong, H.-Z., Z. Chen, and A.-M. Lu. 2002. Phylogeny of Chloranthus
(Chloranthaceae) based on nuclear ribosomal ITS and plastid trnL-F
sequence data. American Journal of Botany 89: 940-946.

Kramer, E. M., R. L. Dorit, and V. F. Irish. 1998. Molecular evolution
of genes controlling petal and stamen development: Duplication and
divergence within the APETALA3 and PISTILLATA MADS-box gene lineages.
Genetics 149: 765-783.

Kuzoff, R. K., L. Hufford, and D. E. Soltis. 2001. Structural homology
and developmental transformations associated with ovary diversification
in Lithophragma (Saxifragaceae). American Journal of Botany 88: 196-205.

Les, D. H., E. L. Schneider, D. J. Padgett, M. Zanis, D. E. Soltis, And
P. S. Soltis. 1999. Phylogeny, classification, and floral evolution of
water lilies (Nymphaeales): a synthesis of non-molecular, rbcL, matK,
and 18S rDNA data. Systematic Botany: 24: 28-46.

Lipok, B., A. A. Gardine, P. S. Williamson, and S. S. Renner. 2000.
Pollination by flies, bees, and beetles of Nuphar ozarkana and N. advena
(Nymphaeaceae). American Journal of Botany 87: 898-902.

Litt, A., and V. Irish. 2003. Duplication and diversification in the
APETALA1/FRUITFULL floral homeotic gene lineage: implications for the
evolution of floral development. Genetics 165: 821-833.

Lockhart, P. J. and D. Penny. 2005. The place of Amborella within the
radiation of angiosperms. Trends Plant Sci 10:201--202.

Loconte, H., and D. W. Stevenson. 1991. Cladistics of the Magnoliidae.
Cladistics 7: 267-296.

Mabberley, D. J. 1993. The plant book: a portable dictionary of the
vascular plants. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Magallón, S., P. R. Crane, and P. S. Herendeen. 1999. Phylogenetic
pattern, diversity, and diversification of eudicots. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 86: 297-372.

Magallón, S., and M. J. Sanderson. 2001. Absolute diversification rates
in angiosperm clades. Evolution 55: 1762-1780.

Martin, W., D. Lydiate, H. Brinkmann, G. Forkmann, H. Saedler and R.
Cerff. 1993. Molecular phylogenies in angiosperm evolution. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 10:140-162.

Mathews, S., and M. J. Donoghue. 1999. The root of angiosperm phylogeny
inferred from duplicate phytochrome genes. Science 286: 947-949.

Mathews, S., and M. J. Donoghue. 2000. Basal angiosperm phylogeny
inferred from duplicate phytochromes A and C. International Journal of
Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement): S41-S55.

Nandi, O. I., M. W. Chase, and P. K. Endress. 1998. A combined cladistic
analysis of angiosperms using rbcL and nonmolecular data sets. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 85: 137 - 212.

Nickerson, J., and G. Drouin. 2004. The sequence of the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II is a useful marker for inferring seed plant
phylogeny. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 31: 403-415.

Nickrent, D. L., R. J. Duff, A. Colwell, A. D. Wolfe, N. D. Young, K. E.
Steiner, and C. W. Depamphilis. 1998. Molecular phylogenetic and
evolutionary studies of parasitic plants.In D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis,
and J. J. Doyle \[eds.\], Molecular systematics of plants, vol. 2,
211-241.. Kluwer, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Nickrent, D. L., A. Blarer, Y.-L. Qiu, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, and
M. Zanis. 2002. Molecular data place Hydnoraceae with Aristolochiaceae.
American Journal of Botany 89: 1809-1817.

Nickrent, D. L. and D. E. Soltis. 1995. A comparison of angiosperm
phylogenies from nuclear 18S rDNA and rbcL sequences. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 82:208-234. Parkinson, C. L., K. L. Adams, and
J. D. Palmer. 1999. Multigene analyses identify the three earliest
lineages of extant flowering plants. Current Biology 9: 1485-1488.

Perkins, J. 1925. Ubersicht uber die Gattungen der Monimiaceae.
Engelmann, Leipzig, Germany.

Posluszny, U., and P. B. Tomlinson. 2003. Aspects of inflorescence and
floral development in the putative basal angiosperm Amborella trichopoda
(Amborellaceae). Canadian Journal of Botany 81: 28-39.

Pyankov, V. I., E. G. Artyusheva, G. E. Edwards, C. C. J. Black, and P.
S. Soltis. 2001. Phylogenetic analysis of tribe Salsoleae
(Chenopodiaceae) based on ribosomal ITS sequences: implications for the
evolution of photosynthesis types. American Journal of Botany 88:
1189-1198.

Qiu, Y.-L., J. Lee, F. Bernasconi-Quadroni, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis,
M. Zanis, Z. Chen, V. Savolainen, and M. W. Chase. 1999. The earliest
angiosperms: evidence from mitochondrial, plastid and nuclear genomes.
Nature 402: 404-407.

Qiu, Y.-L., J.-Y. Lee, F. Bernasconi-Quadroni, D. E. Soltis, P. S.
Soltis, M. Zanis, E. Zimmer, Z. Chen, V. Savolainen, and M. Chase. 2000.
Phylogeny of basal angiosperms: analyses of five genes from three
genomes. International Journal of Plant Sciences 161 (Supplement):
S3-S27.

Ray, J. 1703. Methodus plantarum emendata et aucta. Smith and Walford,
London, UK.

Reichenbach, H. G. L. 1827-1829. Dr. Joh. Christ, Moessler\'s Handbuch
der Gewaechskunde, \[ed.\] vols. 2, 3. Hammerich, Altona, Germany.

Renner, S. S. 1999. Circumscription and phylogeny of the Laurales:
evidence from molecular and morphological data. American Journal of
Botany 86: 1301-1315.

Rodman, J. E., P. S. Soltis, D. E. Soltis, K. J. Sytsma, and K. G.
Karol. 1998. Parallel evolution of glucosinolate biosynthesis inferred
from congruent nuclear and plastid gene phylogenies. American Journal of
Botany 85: 997-1006.

Rodrìguez-Trelles, F., R. Tarrìo, and F. J. Ayala. 2002. A
methodological bias toward overestimation of molecular evolutionary time
scales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 99:
8112-8115.

Ronse De Craene, L. P., P. S. Soltis, and D. E. Soltis. 2003. Evolution
of floral structures in basal angiosperms. International Journal of
Plant Sciences 164 (Supplement): S329-S363.

Sanderson, M. J. and M. J. Donoghue. 1994. Shifts in diversification
rate with the origin of angiosperms. Science 264:1590-1593.

Sanderson, M., J., and J. A. Doyle. 2001. Sources of error and
confidence intervals in estimating the age of angiosperms from rbcL and
18S rDNA data. American Journal of Botany 88: 1499-1516.

Sanderson, M. J. et al. 2004.

Sauquet, H., J. A. Doyle, T. Scharaschkin, T. Borsch, K. W. Hilu, L. W.
Chatrou, and A. Le Thomas. 2003. Phylogenetic analysis of Magnoliales
and Myristicaceae based on multiple data sets: implications for
character evolution. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 142:
125-186.

Savolainen, V., M. W. Chase, C. M. Morton, D. E. Soltis, C. Bayer, M. F.
Fay, A. De Bruijn, S. Sullivan, and Y.-L. Qiu. 2000. Phylogenetics of
flowering plants based upon a combined analysis of plastid atpB and rbcL
gene sequences. Systematic Biology 49: 306-362.

Savolainen, V., M. F. Fay, D. C. Albach, A. Backlund, M. Van Der Bank,
K. M. Cameron, S. A. Johnson, M. D. Lledó, J.-C. Pintaud, M. Powell, M.
C. Sheahan, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, P. Weston, W. M. Whitton, K. J.
Wurdack, and M. W. Chase. 2000b. Phylogeny of the eudicots: a nearly
complete familial analysis based on rbcL gene sequences. Kew Bulletin
55: 257-309.

Schneider, E. L. 1979. Pollination biology of the Nymphaeaceae. In D. M.
Caron \[ed.\], Proceedings of the fourth international symposium on
pollination, 419-430. Maryland Agricultural Experiment Station Special
Miscellaneous Publication 1. College Park, Maryland, USA.

Soltis, D. E., and P. S. Soltis. 2004. Amborella NOT a \"basal
angiosperm\"? Not so fast. American Journal of Botany: in press.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, D. R. Morgan, S. M. Swensen, B. C. Mullin,
J. M. Dowd, and P. G. Martin. 1995. Chloroplast gene sequence data
suggest a single origin of the predisposition for symbiotic nitrogen
fixation in angiosperms. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA 92: 2647-2651.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, D. L. Nickrent, L. A. Johnson, W. J. Hahn,
S. B. Hoot, J. A. Sweere, R. K. Kuzoff, K. A. Kron, M. W. Chase, S. M.
Swensen, E. A. Zimmer, S.-M. Chaw, L. J. Gillespie, W. J. Kress, and K.
J. Sytsma. 1997. Angiosperm phylogeny inferred from 18S ribosomal DNA
sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 84: 1-49.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. E. Mort, M. W. Chase, V. Savolainen, S.
B. Hoot, and C. M. Morton. 1998. Infering complex phylogeneis using
parsimony: an empirical approach using three large DNA data sets for
angiosperms. Systematic Biology 47: 32-42.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. W. Chase, M. E. Mort, D. C. Albach, M.
Zanis, V. Savolainen, W. J. Hahn, S. B. Hoot, M. F. Fay, M. Axtell, S.
M. Swensen, L. M. Prince, W. J. Kress, K. C. Nixon, and J. S. Farris.
2000. Angiosperm phylogeny inferred from 18S rDNA, rbcL, and atpB
sequences. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 133: 381-461.

Soltis, D. E., A. E. Senters, M. Zanis, S. Kim, J. D. Thompson, P. S.
Soltis, L. P. Ronse De Craene, P. K. Endress, and J. S. Farris. 2003.
Gunnerales are sister to other core eudicots: implications for the
evolution of pentamery. American Journal of Botany 90: 461-470.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. W. Chase, and P. K. Endress. 2004.
Angiosperm phylogeny, classification, and evolution. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, DC, USA: in press.

Soltis, D. E., V. A. Albert, V. Savolainen, K. W. Hilu, Y-L. Qiu, M. W.
Chase, J., S. Farris, S. Stefanovic, D. W. Rice, J. D. Palmer, and P. S.
Soltis. Genome-scale data, angiosperm relationships, and \"ending
incongruence\": a cautionary tale in phylogenetics. Trends in Plant
Science, in press.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. Soltis, and M. W. Chase. 1999. Angiosperm phylogeny
inferred from multiple genes as a tool for comparative biology. Nature
402:402-404.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. Soltis, M. J. Zanis, and S. Kim. 2000. Basal
lineages of angiosperms: Relationships and implications for floral
evolution. International Journal of Plant Science161(Supplement):
S97-S107.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. soltis, V. savolainen, P. R. Crane, and T. G.
Barraclough. 2002. Rate heterogeneity among lineages of tracheophytes:
integration of molecular and fossil data and evidence for molecular
living fossils. Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences, USA 99:
4430-4435.

Soltis, P. S., D. E. Soltis, M. W. Chase, P. K. Endress, and P. R.
Crane. 2004. The diversification of flowering plants. In J. Cracraft and
M. J. Donoghue \[eds.\], The tree of life. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.

Stebbins, G. L. 1974. Flowering Plants: Evolution Above the Species
Level. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Sun, G., D.
L. Dilcher, S. Zheng, and Z. Zhou. 1998. In search of the first flower:
A Jurassic angiosperm, Archaefructus, from northeast China. Science 282:
1692-1695.

Stefanovic, S. D. W. Rice, and J. D. Palmer. 2004. Long branch
attraction, taxon sampling, and the earliest angiosperms: Amborella or
monocots? BMC Evolutionary Biology 4:35.

Sun, G., Q. Ji, D. L. Dilcher, S. Zheng, K. C. Nixon, and X. Wang. 2002.
Archaefructaceae, a new basal angiosperm family. Science 296: 899-904.

Swensen, S. M. 1996. The evolution of actinorhizal symbioses: evidence
for multiple origins of the symbiotic association. American Journal of
Botany 83: 1503-1512.

Sytsma, K. J., and D. A. Baum. 1996. Molecular phylogenies and the
diversification of angiosperms. In D. W. Taylor and L. J. Hickey
\[eds.\], Flowering plant origin, evolution, and phylogeny, 314-340.
Chapman and Hall, New York, USA.

Takhtajan, A. 1980. Outline of the classification of flowering plants
(Magnoliophyta). Botanical Review 46: 225-359.

Takhtajan, A. 1987. System of Magnoliophyta. Academy of Sciences,
Leningrad, USSR.

Takhtajan, A. 1991. Evolutionary Trends in Flowering Plants. New York;
Columbia Univ. Press.

Takhtajan, A. 1997. Diversity and classification of flowering plants.
Columbia University Press, New York, USA.

Taylor, D. and L. Hickey. 1992. Phylogenetic evidence for the herbaceous
origin of angiosperms. Plant Systematics and Evolution 180:137-156.

Thorne, R. F. 1974. A phylogenetic classification of the Annoniflorae.
Aliso 8: 147-209.

Thorne, R. F. 1992. Classification and geography of the flowering
plants. Botanical Review 58: 225-348.

Tillich, H.-J. 1995. Seedling and systematics in monocotyledons. In P.
J. Rudall, P. J. Cribb, D. F. Cutler, and C. J. Humphries \[eds.\],
Monocotyledons: systematics and evolution, 303-352. Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, London, UK.

Tomlinson, P. B. 1995. Non-homology of vascular organisation in
monocotyledons and dicotyledons. In P. J. Rudall, P. J. Cribb, D. F.
Cutler, and C. J. Humphries \[eds.\], Monocotyledons: systematics and
evolution, 589-622. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, London, UK.

van Tieghem, P. 1897. Sur les Buxaées. Annales des Sciences Naturelles
Botanique. Série 8, 5: 289-338.

Walker, J. W., and A. G. Walker. 1984. Ultrastructure of Lower
Cretaceous angiosperm pollen and the origin and early evolution of
flowering plants. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 71: 464-521.

Warming, E. 1879. Haandbog I den systematiske botanik. P. G. Philipsens
Forlag, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Wikström, N., V. Savolainen, and M. W. Chase. 2001. Evolution of the
angiosperms: calibrating the family tree. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, B 268: 2211-2220.

Williams, P. S., and E. L. Schneider. 1993. Nelumbonaceae. In K.
Kubitzki, J. Rohwer, and V. Bittrich \[eds.\], The families and genera
of vascular plants, 470-473. Springer, Berlin, Germany.

Wilson, T. K. 1966. The comparative morphology of the Canellaceae. IV.
Floral morphology and conclusions. American Journal of Botany 53:
336-343.

Yoo, M. J., C. D. Bell, P. S. Soltis, and D. E. Soltis. In press.
Divergence Times and Historical Biogeography of Nymphaeales. Systematic
Botany.

Young, D. A. 1981. Are the angiosperms primitively vesselless?
Systematic Biology 6: 313-330.

Zanis, M., D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, S. Mathews, and M. J. Donoghue.
2002. The root of the angiosperms revisited. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA 99: 6848-6853.

Zanis, M. J., P. S. Soltis, Y.-L. Qiu, E. Zimmer, and D. E. Soltis.
2003. Phylogenetic analyses and perianth evolution in basal angiosperms.
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 90: 129-150.

Zhang, L.-B., and S. Renner. 2003. The deepest splits in Chloranthaceae
as resolved by chloroplast sequences. International Journal of Plant
Sciences 164 (Supplement) S383-S392.

Zimmer, E. A., R. K. Hamby, M. L. Arnold, D. A. LeBlanc and E. C.
Theriot. 1989. Ribosomal RNA phylogenies and flowering plant evolution.
Pp. 205-214 in The Hierarchy of Life, ed. B. Fernholm, K. Bremer and H.
Jornvall. Amsterdam; Elsevier.

Zwickl, D. J., and D. M. Hillis. 2002. Increased taxon sampling greatly
reduces phylogenetic error. Systematic Biology 51: 588-598.

##### Title Illustrations

![Nymphaea water lilies](1744waterlilies.jpg)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Nymphaea
  Location ::        Okavango Delta, Botswana
  Comments          Nymphaea water lilies (Nymphaeales) in a lagoon
  Copyright ::         © 1990 [Greg and Marybeth Dimijian](http://www.dimijianimages.com/) 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Cultivated sunflowers](sunflowersk5751-1.jpg)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Helianthus annuus
  Location ::        Fargo, North Dakota
  Comments          Cultivated sunflowers (Euangiosperms, Asteraceae)
  Creator           Photograph by Bruce Fritz
  Copyright ::         © [USDA Agricultural Research Service USDA Agricultural Research Service](http://www.ars.usda.gov/is/graphics/photos/) 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Acacia tortilis tree](13077acacia.jpg)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Acacia tortilis
  Location ::        southern Serengeti near Ndutu, Tanzania
  Comments          (Euangiosperms, Fabaceae)
  Copyright ::         © [Greg and Marybeth Dimijian](http://www.dimijianimages.com/) 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
