---
title: Anthozoa
---

## Phylogeny 


-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Cnidaria](Cnidaria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Cnidaria
    -   Anthozoa

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Zoantharia](Zoantharia.md)

# Anthozoa

## Sea Anemones, Corals, Sea Pens 

[Daphne G. Fautin and Sandra L. Romano](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![ ](img0077_002.jpg)
![ ](octocorallia_002.jpg)

-   *Alcyonaria* [(soft corals, sea pens)]
-   *[Zoantharia](Zoantharia.md "go to ToL page")* [(sea
    anemones, stony corals, black corals)]

Containing group: [Cnidaria](Cnidaria.md)

### Information on the Internet

[Images of Cnidarians](http://biodidac.bio.uottawa.ca/index.htm)

### Introduction

Anthozoans are exclusively marine, polypoid cnidarians. They include the
familiar sea anemones, and other anemone-like groups with skeletons
(such as the \"stony\" scleractinian corals) and without skeletons (such
as tube anemones), as well as sea pens, sea fans, blue coral, and black
coral. Anthozoans occur from the intertidal zone to the depths of the
trenches (to 6000 m). In excess of 6000 species currently exist (Hyman
1940), comprising about two-thirds of extant cnidarian species (Dunn
1982); some anthozoans, such as the scleractinian corals, have a rich
fossil history (Wells and Hill 1956).

An anthozoan polyp, like polyps in other cnidarian classes, consists of
a tubular body terminating in a mouth surrounded by a ring of tentacles.
The tentacles of an anthozoan polyp, unlike those of some other classes,
are hollow, so the coelenteric space extends into them. The mesoglea
between the ectoderm and the endoderm is relatively thick and cellular
in many anthozoans compared to that of polyps in the other classes. The
skeletal elements of some taxa are internal, lying in the thick
mesogleal layer, whereas other anthozoans have skeletons lying entirely
outside the living tissues (Fautin and Mariscal 1991).

Most anthozoan orders contain exclusively colonial species. An anthozoan
colony consists of polyps connected by living tissue, the coenenchyme.
The members of a colony are derived by vegetative (asexual) propagation
from an original founder polyp that was the product of sexual
reproduction, possibly with rare exceptions. At least some individuals
of clonal species, like those of colonial species, propagate
vegetatively by means such as fission, budding, or laceration, but,
unlike in colonial species, the progeny do not remain attached to one
another. Anthozoans of other species are incapable of asexual
reproduction (e.g. Shick 1991).

### Characteristics

Anthozoans are characterized by two anatomically related structures, the
actinopharynx and the mesenteries, which are unique among cnidarian
polyps (Figure 1). The actinopharynx, or stomodeum, is a tubular gullet
extending from the mouth some distance into the coelenteron. The
actinopharynx of most species contains at least one histologically
specialized, flagellated longitudinal channel called a siphonoglyph that
drives water into the coelenteron. In most sea anemones and corals, two
siphonoglyphs are situated diametrically opposite one another in the
actinopharynx. Siphonoglyphs and their associated structures impart a
bilateral or biradial symmetry to the polyp (e.g. Shick 1991).

![ ](crossup.jpg)

![ ](crossdown.jpg)

Figure 1. Cross-section of an anthozoan, the sea anemone *Megalactis*
sp., at the level of the actinopharynx.\
Image copyright © 2000 Adorian Ardelean.

Longitudinal sheets of tissue termed mesenteries extend radially from
the body wall; some (\"complete\" or \"perfect\" ones) reach all the way
to the actinopharynx. The mesenteries that attach to the siphonoglyphs
may be anatomically specialized. Longitudinal retractor muscles of the
mesenteries enable the polyp to retract. Along the free edge of each
mesentery may be filaments provided with cilia, gland cells, and cnidae.
The cilia probably circulate fluid that otherwise might stagnate in the
compartments defined by the mesenteries; the cnidae and gland cells
function in digestion (Fautin and Mariscal 1991). The term \"septum,\"
which is sometimes used as a synonym for mesentery, properly refers to
the calcified radial partition of the scleractinian skeleton that lies
between a pair of mesenteries (Bayer et al. 1983).

It is inferred that the mesenteries increase surface area for
respiration and especially absorption of food. They also provide
support. Perhaps for these reasons, anthozoans of some species can grow
much larger than polyps in any other class of Cnidaria \-- to a diameter
of 1.25 m for the \"giant\" sea anemone *Stichodactyla mertensii* (see
Dunn 1981) (Title Figure 1). The gametogenic tissue of anthozoans lies
between the longitudinal retractor muscle and the edge of a mesentery
(but not all mesenteries of an individual may be gametogenic); gametes
are derived from endodermal cells (eg Wedi and Dunn 1983). Polyps of
some anthozoan species are gonochoric, those of some species are
hermaphroditic, and those of still others change sex during their
lifetime. Anthozoans of many species broadcast their gametes, but
brooding of embryos within the coelenteron and attached to the external
surface of the polyp is known (Fautin et al. 1989).

### Variation within Anthozoa

Molecular data (France et al. 1996; Berntson et al. 1999; see Discussion
of Phylogenetic Relationships below) support the division of the class
into two groups, which are externally distinguished by the number and
form of a polyp\'s tentacles. Subclass Alcyonaria (= Octocorallia)
includes animals such as soft corals, sea fans, sea pens, and blue
corals. Each polyp has eight tentacles that are pinnately branched
(Title Figure 2); there are also eight complete mesenteries, so the
space between each two mesenteries extends into one tentacle. The
actinopharynx of each polyp has a single siphonoglyph. Alcyonarians of
most species form colonies and skeletons. Mariscal (in Fautin and
Mariscal 1991) proposed Alcyonaria be elevated to the rank of class.
Extant members of subclass Zoantharia (= Hexacorallia) include sea
anemones, \"stony\" corals, and black corals. Despite the name of the
subclass, almost no members have six tentacles. Rather, zoantharians
typically have (approximately) a multiple of six mesenteries and
tentacles. Depending on the taxon, one or more than one tentacle may
arise from each intermesenterial space.

Zoantharians fall into two clear groups: those in which mesenteries
occur singly (Antipatharia \[black corals\] and Ceriantharia \[tube
anemones\]), and those in which the mesenteries develop in pairs (all
the others; see Figure 1). Black corals are the only exclusively
colonial zoantharians.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Class Anthozoa is traditionally considered to have two or three
subclasses. Hyman (1940) divided the class into Alcyonaria and
Zoantharia, based largely on polyp symmetry and tentacle form and
number. Wells and Hill (1956) recognized a third subclass,
Ceriantipatharia (listed also by Dunn 1982), based on similarity of the
ceriantharian larval stage to the antipatharian polyp, on the very weak
mesentery musculature in both groups, and on the insertion of new
mesenterial couples only in the dorsal intermesenterial space of members
of both orders. Evidence from morphology (Hand 1966), nematocysts (Hand
1966, Schmidt 1974), and DNA (France et al. 1996, Song and Won 1997,
Berntson et al. 1999) does not support the monophyly of the Ceriantharia
and Antipatharia. Indeed, Hand (1966) suggested division of Anthozoa
into four subclasses (Antipatharia, Ceriantharia, Zoantharia, and
Alcyonaria) could be justified. While the most complete molecular data
available (Berntson et al. 1999) do not support the monophyly of the
Ceriantharia and Antipatharia, placement of the Ceriantharia remains
uncertain. The Ceriantharia may merit subclass status but more data are
necessary to determine its phylogenetic position (Berntson et al. 1999).

We have chosen to follow Hyman (1940) in treating Antipatharia and
Ceriantharia as orders of subclass Zoantharia. The zoantharian lineage
has been interpreted as derived from the Alcyonaria, based on
development (e.g. Hand 1966) and nematocysts (Schmidt 1974), but DNA
sequences obtained thus far (Song et al. 1994, Bridge et al. 1995, Chen
et al. 1995, France et al. 1996, Song and Won 1997, Berntson et al.
1999) support a sister relationship between Alcyonaria and Zoantharia.

### Anthozoan Relationships Forum

The phylogenetic relationships of anthozoan subgroups are currently the
subject of much debate. In the above Discussion of Phylogenetic
Relationships, Daphne Fautin and Sandra Romano have given a summary of
the most important issues. Many open questions remain, and there is some
controversy about the conclusions that can be drawn from the data
collected to date. In order to adequately represent alternative points
of view in this discussion, we have established an [Anthozoan Relationship Forum](http://www.tolweb.org/accessory/Anthozoan_Relationships_Forum?acc_id=584)
on a linked page.

### References

Bayer, F. M. 1956. Octocorallia. Pp. F166-F230 in: R. C. Moore (ed.),
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology Part F: Coelenterata. Geological
Society of America and University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Bayer, F. M., M. Grasshoff, and J. Verseveldt. 1983. Illustrated
trilingual glossary of morphological and anatomical terms applied to
Octocorallia. E. J. Brill / Dr. W.Backhuys, Leiden. 75 pp.

Berntson, E. A., S. C. France, and L. S. Mullineaux. 1999. Phylogenetic
relationships within the Class Anthozoa (Phylum Cnidaria) based on
nuclear 18S rDNA sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 13:
417-433.

Bridge, D., C. W. Cunningham, R. deSalle, and L. W. Buss. 1995.
Class-level relationships in the phylum Cnidaria: Molecular and
morphological evidence. Molecular Biology and Evolution 12: 679-689.

Chen, C. A., D. M. Odorico, M. ten Lohuis, J. E. N. Veron, and D. J.
Miller. 1995. Systematic relationships within the Anthozoa (Cnidaria:
Anthozoa) using the 5\'-end of the 28S rDNA. Molecular Phylogeny and
Evolution 4: 175-183.

Dunn, D. F. 1981. The clownfish sea anemones: Stichodactylidae
(Coelenterata: Actiniaria) and other sea anemones symbiotic with
pomacentrid fishes. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society
71(1): 1-115.

Dunn, D. F. 1982. Cnidaria. Pp. 669-706 in S. P. Parker (ed.), Synopsis
and Classification of Living Organisms, volume 1. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York and other cities.

Fautin, D. G. and R. N. Mariscal. 1991. Cnidaria: Anthozoa. Pp. 267-358
in F. W. Harrison and J. A. Westfall (eds.), Microscopic Anatomy of
Invertebrates, volume 2: Placozoa, Porifera, Cnidaria, and Ctenophora.
Wiley-Liss, Inc., New York and other cities.

Fautin, D. G., J. G. Spaulding, and F.-S. Chia. 1989. Cnidaria. Pp.
43-62 in K. G. Adiyodi and R. G. Adiyodi (eds.), Reproductive Biology of
Invertebrates, volume 4, part A (Fertilization, Development, and
Parental Care). Oxford and IBH Publ. Co., New Delhi.

France, S. C., P. E. Rosel, J. E. Agenbroad, L. S. Mullineaux, and T. D.
Kocher. 1996. DNA sequence variation of mitochondrial large-subunit rRNA
provides support for a two subclass organization of the Anthozoa
(Cnidaria). Molecular Marine Biology and Biotechnology 5: 15-28.

Hand, C. 1966. On the evolution of the Actiniaria. Pages 135-146 in W.
J. Rees (ed.), The Cnidaria and their Evolution. Academic Press, London
and New York.

Hyman, L. 1940. The Invertebrates. McGraw-Hill, New York. 726 pp.

Hyman, L. H. 1956. Morphology of living coelenterates. Pp. F10-F20 in:
R. C. Moore (ed.), Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology Part F:
Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of Kansas
Press, Lawrence.

Oliver, W. A. J. and A. G. Coates. 1987. Phylum Cnidaria. Pp. 140-193 in
R. S. Boardman, A. H. Cheetham, and A. J. Rowell (eds.), Fossil
Invertebrates. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Palo Alto, California.

Schmidt, H. 1974. On evolution in the Anthozoa. Proceedings of the
Second International Coral Reef Symposium 1: 533-560.

Schuchert, P. 1993. Phylogenetic analysis of the Cnidaria. Zeitschrift
fuer zoologische Systematik und Evolutionsforschung 31: 161-173.

Shick, J. M. 1991. A Functional Biology of Sea Anemones. Chapman and
Hall, London and other cities. 395 pp.

Song, J.-I., W. Kim, E. K. Kim, and J. Kim. 1994. Molecular phylogeny of
anthozoans (phylum Cnidaria) based on the nucleotide sequences of 18S
rRNA gene. Korean Journal of Zoology 37: 343-351.

Song, J.-I. and J. H. Won. 1997. Systematic relationship of the
anthozoan orders based on the partial nuclear 18S rRNA sequences. Korean
Journal of Biological Science 1: 43-52.

Wedi, S. E. and D. F. Dunn. 1983. Gametogenesis and reproductive
periodicity of the subtidal sea anemone Urticina lofotensis
(Coelenterata: Actiniaria) in California. Biological Bulletin 165:
458-472.

Wells, J. W. 1956. Scleractinia. Pp. F328-F440 in: R. C. Moore (ed.),
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology Part F: Coelenterata. Geological
Society of America and University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Wells, J. W. and D. Hill. 1956. Anthozoa - general features. Pp.
F161-F165 in: R. C. Moore (ed.), Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology
Part F: Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of
Kansas Press, Lawrence.

##### Title Illustrations

![](img0077.jpg)

  ------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Stichodactyla mertensii
  Comments             The \"giant\" sea anemone, a member of subclass Zoantharia.
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © 1999 Gerald R. Allen
  ------------------------
![](octocorallia.jpg)

  ----------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Alcyonaria
  Comments          Colony of alcyonarians (\"soft corals\"). Note eight tentacles on each polyp.
  Copyright ::         © 1999 George Miller
  ----------------------------