---
title: Microchiroptera
---

# [[Microchiroptera]]

## Echolocating Bats 

![ ](pteronotus_parnellii.gif)
![ ](uroderma1.gif)

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> Microbats constitute the suborder **Microchiroptera** within the order Chiroptera (bats). Bats have long been differentiated into Megachiroptera (megabats) and Microchiroptera, based on their size, the use of echolocation by the Microchiroptera and other features; molecular evidence suggests a somewhat different subdivision, as the microbats have been shown to be a paraphyletic group.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microbat) 


## Introduction

[Nancy B. Simmons and Tenley Conway]()

Microchiropteran bats are also known as \"echolocating bats\" because
they have the ability to use echolocation in obstacle avoidance and
hunting. These bats occur on every continent but Antartica. Every food
preference that is found in bats is represented in Microchiroptera,
although the majority are predominatly insectivorous. Several notable
microchiropteran bats include *Craseonycteris* (Bumblebee Bat), which is
one of the smallest mammals in the world, *Thyroptera * (Disc-winged
Bats), which attach to leaves using suction cuplike discs on the foot
and thumb, and Desmodontinae, which are the only blood-feeding bats.

[Classification](http://www.tolweb.org/accessory/Classification_of_Bats?acc_id=505)
outlines the higher-level classifications within Microchiroptera.

### Echolocation

Microchiropterans navigate with the aid of echolocation, also known as
\"biosonar.\" This is similar to the mechanical sonar systems used by
humans. A signal is emitted and the returning sound is analyzed to learn
about the surrounding environment. Microchiropteran bats are not the
only animals that use echolocation. Toothed whales, some insectivores
(eg., shrews), oilbirds, and some swiftlets also use echolocation.

Echolocating bats typically emit an ultrasonic (over 15 kilohertz)
pulse, and analyze the returning echo to determine the distance to the
object as well as what type of object it is (Fenton, 1992). Most bats
alternate between emitting sound and listening for returning sound. The
frequency, length of call, intensity, and degree of modulations of the
emitted sound differs between species, and there may even be differences
between individuals within a species.

Echolocation calls are vocalizations that are produced in the larynx
(voice box). Calls are emitted through the mouth or the nostrils. Bats
that emit calls through the nostrils, such as Phyllostomidae and
Rhinolophidae, often have complex folds and/or flaps surrounding the
nostrils, which may affect the signal.

A few megachiropterans also use echolocation (e.g., some species of
*Rousettus*), but these bats produce sound by clicking their tongues
rather than by vocalization. The different method of sound creation is
one reason why echolocation is believed to have evolved independently in
Microchiroptera and the few echolocating megachiropteran bats.
Echolocation is not thought to have been present in the common ancestor
of Megachiroptera and Microchiroptera (Simmons and Geisler, 1998).

The ability to echolocate has allowed many bats to exploit flying
nocturnal insects as a food source, as well as to live in dark caves. In
neither situation can one successfully rely on vision alone to locate
objects due to the limited amount of light. Most likely as a result of
increased reliance on echolocation, microchiropterans have reduced
vision capabilities, having lost some of the complexity found in the
eyes and brains of megachiropteran bats.

While echolocation has many benefits, it also has costs. The most
pronounced is that other animals can often hear the signals emitted by
bats. Those who are able to hear the sounds include other bats,
potential predators, and prey. Some moths have evolved complex ears,
apparently for listening to bats. When such a moth hears calls of an
approaching bat, it begins evasive maneuvers. Some insects actually emit
sounds in response to bat calls. This apparently confuses the bat
although it does not directly jam the signal.

### Characteristics

Microchiroptera is diagnosed by the following synapomorphies: a free
premaxilla, only two lower premolars on each side of the jaw, and a
xiphisternum with a medial keel (Simmons and Geisler, 1998). However,
these features are troublesome as many lineages within Microchiroptera
have apparently secondarily evolved different conditions.

Several other soft-tissue characteristics are found in Microchiroptera,
but not Megachiroptera. These characteristics include the presence of a
tragus, a small or absent aquaeductus cochleae, the presence of a
sophisticated echolocation system, the m. styloglossus originating from
the ventral surface of the midpoint of the stylohyal, the clavicle
articulating with the coracoid process of the scapula, the m.
spinotrapesius clearly differentiated from the trapezius complex, the m.
acromiodeltoideus not originating from the thoracic vertebra, the angle
of the spinal cord between the dorsal horns from 0 to 25°, and the
inferior colliculus larger than the superior colliculus (Simmons and
Geisler, 1998). As these features can not be examined in the fossil
material collected to date, it is not known whether they also occured in
fossils which are closely related to Microchiroptera. Thus, these
characteristics can only indirectly support microchiropteran monophyly.

 

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Monophyly of Microchiroptera is strongly supported. A variety of data
have been analyzed to help resolve the relationships of families within
this clade, including osteological characteristics (Smith, 1976; Van
Valen, 1979), fetal membrane traits (Luckett, 1980), auditory region
morphology (Novacek, 1980), hyoid region characteristics (Griffiths and
Smith, 1991; Griffiths et al., 1992), transferrin immunological distance
data (Pierson, 1986), rDNA restriction sites (Baker et al., 1991), and
DNA hybridization data (Kirsch et al., In press). The most recent
comprehensive analyses were those of Simmons (1998) and Simmons and
Geisler (1998), who combined all of these data (with the exception of
immunological and DNA-hybridization data). Analysis of this large data
set produced a relatively well-resolved, well supported phylogeny of
Microchiroptera. Interestingly, this tree is largely compatible with
trees produced from distance data by Kirsch et al. (In press).

An early phylogentic hypothesis proposed by Smith (1976) indicated two
clades within Microchiroptera: Yinochiroptera (Emballonuridae,
Rhinolopoidea) and Yangochiroptera (Noctilionoidea and
Vespertilionoidea). Other analyses, however, have not supported these
clades. Van Valen's (1979) tree suggests that neither Yinochiroptera nor
Yangochiroptera are monophyletic due to a close relationship between
Emballonuridae and Noctilionoidea. Pierson (1986) concluded that
Yinochiroptera was monophyletic, but due to the close relationship
between Vespertilioninae and Yinochiroptera, Yangochiroptera was not.
Simmons (1998) and Simmons and Geisler's (1998) analyses suggested the
reverse, a monophyletic Yangochiroptera and a paraphyletic
Yinochiroptera. The latter appears paraphyletic due to Emballonuridae
placed as the basal branch in Microchiroptera.

Alternative Trees:

Smith (1976)

                          ==== Emballonuridae 
         ==Yinochiroptera=|
         |                ==== Rhinoloppoidea 
    =====|
         |                 === Noctilionoidea  (Phyllostomoidea) 
         ==Yangochiroptera=|
                           === Vespertilionoidea 

Van Valen (1979)

            ============ Rhinopomatidae 
            |
            |  ========= Rhinolophoidea 
            |  |
         ===|  |     === Emballonuridae 
         |  ===|  ===|
    =====|     ===|  === Craseonycteridae   
         |        |
         |        ====== Noctilionoidea 
         |
         |  ============ Vespertilionoidea  (including Mystacinidae) 
         ===|
            ============ Natalidae  (including Thyropteridae and Natalidae) 

Pierson (1986)

                        ========= Emballonuridae 
                        |
                        |     === Rhinolophidae 
                        |  ===|
                     ===|  |  === Hipposideridae  
                  ===|  ===|
               ===|  |     |  === Megadermatidae  
            ===|  |  |     ===|
         ===|  |  |  |        === Rhinopomatidae 
    =====|  |  |  |  |
         |  |  |  |  ============ vespertilionids 
         |  |  |  |
         |  |  |  =============== Molossidae 
         |  |  |
         |  |  ================== Thyropteridae  
         |  |
         |  ===================== Noctilionoidea (including Mystacinidae) 
         |
         ======================== Natalidae 

The placement of Emballonuridae has been often debated. Smith placed
Emballonuridae in a monophyletic group containing Craseonycteridae and
Rhinopomatidae, while Van Valen's analysis indicated that Emballonuridae
and Craseonycteridae were more closely related to Noctilionoidea and
Rhinolophoidea than to Rhinopomatidae. Pierson's tree also indicated
that Rhinopomatidae belongs in a clade with Rhinolophoidea, not grouped
with Emballonuridae, and did not support a close relationship between
Emballonuridae and Noctilionoidea.

The relationships of members of the Vespertilionoidea have long been
unclear. Vespertilionidae has been treated as a clade by most authors
(Smith, 1976; Van Valen, 1979; Novacek, 1991). However, the frequent
appearance of this group in discussions of bats may be attributed to the
common assumption of monophyly rather than strong phylogenetic support
for this hypothesis. Pierson (1986), who did not assume Vespertilionidae
monophyly, placed Tomopeatinae and Miniopterinae (usually found within
Vespertilionidae) with Molossoidea and suggested the remaining
vespertilionids form a clade with Yinochiroptera. Recent work (Simmons,
1998; Simmons and Geisler, 1998) has indicated that Vespertilionidae as
traditionally recognized is paraphyletic. Instead, Antrozoinae (which
Simmons \[1998\] raised from subfamily to family rank) appears closely
related to Molossidae and should therefore be placed in Molossoidea;
Myzopodidae, Thyropteridae, Fruipteridae and Natalidae represent a clade
and are here represented in the superfamily Nataloidea. With the removal
of the preceding families, Vespertilionidae, limited to
Vespertilioninae, Miniopterinae, Myotinae, Murininae and Kerivoulinae,
is now monophyletic.\" One group which is fairly well supported is the
clade containing Phyllostomidae, Noctilionidae, and Mormoopidae (=
Noctilionoidea). Mystacinidae, traditionally linked with vespertilionids
and molossids, now appears to be closely related to this group (Pierson,
1986; Kirsch et al., In press) and is therfore here included in the
Noctilionoidea.

 

### Geographic Distribution

![ ](Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Terrestrial/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera/chiroptera.gif)

The geographical distribution of Microchiroptera is shown in red.
Distribution from Hill and Smith (1984).

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Chiroptera](Chiroptera.md)
    -   [Eutheria](Eutheria.md)
    -   [Mammal](Mammal.md)
    -   [Therapsida](../../../../Therapsida.md)
    -   [Synapsida](../../../../../Synapsida.md)
    -   [Amniota](../../../../../../Amniota.md)
    -   [Terrestrial Vertebrates](../../../../../../../Terrestrial.md)
    -   [Sarcopterygii](../../../../../../../../Sarc.md)
    -   [Gnathostomata](../../../../../../../../../Gnath.md)
    -   [Vertebrata](../../../../../../../../../../Vertebrata.md)
    -   [Craniata](../../../../../../../../../../../Craniata.md)
    -   [Chordata](../../../../../../../../../../../../Chordata.md)
    -   [Deuterostomia](../../../../../../../../../../../../../Deutero.md)
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Chiroptera
    -   Microchiroptera

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Rhinopomatoidea](Rhinopomatoidea.md)
    -   [Rhinolophoidea](Rhinolophoidea.md)
    -   [Noctilionoidea](Noctilionoidea.md)
    -   [Nataloidea](Nataloidea.md)
    -   [Molossoidea](Molossoidea.md)
    -   [Vespertilionidae](Vespertilionidae.md)


## Title Illustrations

Pteronotus parnellii (Noctilionoidea) and Uroderma bilobatum(Noctilionoidea)

----------
![](pteronotus_parnellii.gif)
Scientific Name ::  Pteronotus parnellii
Copyright ::         © 1997 Nancy Simmons

----------
![](uroderma1.gif)
Scientific Name ::  Uroderma bilobatum
Copyright ::         © 1997 Nancy Simmons





## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### [Microchiroptera](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.md) 

### [Microchiroptera.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.public.md) 

### [Microchiroptera.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.internal.md) 

### [Microchiroptera.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.protect.md) 

### [Microchiroptera.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.private.md) 

### [Microchiroptera.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.personal.md) 

### [Microchiroptera.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amniota/Synapsida/Therapsida/Mammal/Eutheria/Chiroptera/Microchiroptera.secret.md)

