---
title: Cyanobacteria
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Bacteria](../Bacteria.md)
    -   [Tree of Life](../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Eubacteria
    -   [Aquificae](Aquificae.md)
    -   [Thermotogae](Thermotogae.md)
    -   [Thermodesulfobacteria](Thermodesulfobacteria.md)
    -   [Chrysiogenes arsenatis](Chrysiogenes_arsenatis)
    -   [Nitrospira](Nitrospira.md)
    -   [Deferribacteres](Deferribacteres.md)
    -   [Chloroflexi](Chloroflexi.md)
    -   [Thermomicrobium](Thermomicrobium.md)
    -   [Fibrobacteres](Fibrobacteres.md)
    -   [Proteobacteria](Proteobacteria.md)
    -   [Planctomycetes](Planctomycetes.md)
    -   [Chlamydiae](Chlamydiae.md)
    -   [Spirochaetes](Spirochaetes.md)
    -   [Bacteroidetes](Bacteroidetes.md)
    -   [Chlorobi](Chlorobi.md)
    -   [Actinobacteria](Actinobacteria.md)
    -   [Deinococcus-Thermus](Deinococcus-Thermus.md)
    -   Cyanobacteria
    -   [Firmicutes](Firmicutes.md)
    -   [Fusobacteria](Fusobacteria.md)
    -   [Verrucomicrobia](Verrucomicrobia.md)
    -   [Acidobacteria](Acidobacteria.md)
    -   [Dictyoglomi](Dictyoglomi.md)
    -   [Gemmatimonas aurantiaca](Gemmatimonas_aurantiaca)

-   »

# Cyanobacteria 

![Fischerella ](Cyanobacteria/fischerella.gif)
![ ](Cyanobacteria/prochloron.jpg)
![](Cyanobacteria/spirulina.jpg)

-   *Subsection I*
    -   *Chamaesiphon*
    -   *Chroococcus*
    -   *Cyanobacterium*
    -   *Cyanobium*
    -   *Cyanothece*
    -   *Dactylococcopsis*
    -   *Gloeobacter*
    -   *Gloeocapsa*
    -   *Gloeothece*
    -   *Microcystis*
    -   *Prochlorococcus*
    -   *Prochloron*
    -   *Synechococcus*
    -   *Synechocystis*
-   *Subsection II*
    -   *Cyanocystis*
    -   *Dermocarpella*
    -   *Stanieria*
    -   *Xenococcus*
    -   *Chroococcidiopsis*
    -   *Myxosarcina*
    -   *Pleurocapsa*
-   *Subsection III*
    -   *Arthrospira*
    -   *Borzia*
    -   *Crinalium*
    -   *Geitlerinema*
    -   *Halospirulina*
    -   *Leptolyngbya*
    -   *Limnothrix*
    -   *Lyngbya*
    -   *Microcoleus*
    -   *Oscillatoria*
    -   *Planktothrix*
    -   *Prochlorothrix*
    -   *Pseudanabaena*
    -   *Spirulina*
    -   *Starria*
    -   *Symploca*
    -   *Trichodesmium*
    -   *Tychonema*
-   *Subsection IV*
    -   *Anabaena*
    -   *Anabaenopsis*
    -   *Aphanizomenon*
    -   *Calothrix*
    -   *Cyanospira*
    -   *Cylindrospermopsis*
    -   *Cylindrospermum*
    -   *Nodularia*
    -   *Nostoc*
    -   *Rivularia*
    -   *Scytonema*
    -   *Tolypothrix*
-   *Subsection V*
    -   *Chlorogloeopsis*
    -   *Fischerella*
    -   *Geitleria*
    -   *Iyengariella*
    -   *Nostochopsis*
    -   *Stigonema*

Classification after Castenholz 2001.

Containing group: [Bacteria](../Bacteria.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [Cyanosite](http://www-cyanosite.bio.purdue.edu/). A Webserver for
    Cyanobacterial Research at Purdue University.
    -   [CyBib](http://www-cyanosite.bio.purdue.edu/cybib/cybibhome.html).
        A bibliographic database for scientific literature about
        Cyanobacteria.
    -   [Cyanobacterial Image         Gallery](http://www-cyanosite.bio.purdue.edu/images/images.html).
    -   [Taxonomy of Cyanobacteria after Stanier & Cohen-Bazire         (1977)](http://www-cyanosite.bio.purdue.edu/taxon77.html).
    -   [Taxonomy of Cyanobacteria after Rippka et al.         (1979)](http://www-cyanosite.bio.purdue.edu/taxon79.html).
-   [Comparative Chloroplast Genomics: Integrating Computational     Methods, Molecular Evolution, and     Phylogeny](http://evogen.jgi.doe.gov/second_levels/chloroplasts/jansen_project_home/chlorosite.html).
    DOE Joint Genome Institute.
-   [The Microbial World:     Cyanobacteria](http://helios.bto.ed.ac.uk/bto/microbes/cyano.htm).
    University of Edinburgh.
-   [Introduction to the     Cyanobacteria](http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/bacteria/cyanointro.html).
    UCMP Berkeley.
-   [Marine Cyanobacteria](http://www.ng.hik.se/%7Enjasv/). Maintained
    by Sven Janson.
-   [The Blue-Green Groove     Machine](http://www.micro.unsw.edu.au/brett.html). Biodiversity and
    Natural Products of Cyanobacteria. University of New South Wales.
-   [CyanoNews](http://www.science.richmond.edu/%7Ebiology/cyanonews/).
    A newsletter intended to provide cyanobacteriologists with a forum
    for rapid informal communication.
-   [University of Toronto Culture Collection of Algae and Cyanobacteria     (UTCC)](http://www.botany.utoronto.ca/utcc/).
-   [CyanoBase](http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/cyano.html). A project to
    sequence the entire genome of the Cyanobacterium Synechocystis.
    Kazusa DNA Research Institute.

### References

Anagnostidis, K. and J. Komárek. 1988. Modern approach to the
classification system of cyanophytes. 3---Oscillatoriales. Arch.
Hydrobiol. (Suppl 80) Algol. Stud. 50/53:327--472.

Barbrook, A. C., P. J. Lockhart, and C. J. Howe. 1998. Phylogenetic
analysis of plastid origins based on secA sequences. Current Genetics
34:336-341.

Bhattacharya, D. and L. Medlin. 1995. The phylogeny of plastids: a
review based on comparisons of small-subunit ribosomal RNA coding
regions. Journal of Phycology 31:489--498.

Bergman, B., J. Gallon, A. N. Rai, and L. Stal. 1997. Nitrogen fixing
non-heterocystous cyanobacteria. FEMS Microbiological Reviews
19:139-185.

Bryant, D. B. (ed.) 1994. The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Boston.

Capone, D. G, J. P. Zehr, H. W.Paerl, B. Bergman, and E. J.Carpenter.
1997. Trichodesmium, a globally significant marine cyanobacterium.
Science 276:1221-1229.

Carr, N. G. and B. A. Whitton (eds.) 1982. The Biology of Cyanobacteria.
Blackwell Science Publications, Oxford.

Castenholz, R. W. 1992. Species usage, concept, and evolution in the
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). Journal of Phycology 28:737-745.

Castenholz, R. W. 2001. Phylum BX. Cyanobacteria. Oxygenic
Photosynthetic Bacteria. In: Bergey\'s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology. Volume 1: The Archaea and the Deeply Branching and
Phototropic Bacteria. Second Edition. G. Garrity, D. R. Boone, and R. W.
Castenholz (eds.) Springer-Verlag, New York.

Chisholm, S. W., R. J. Olson, E. R. Zettler, R. Goericke, J. B.
Waterbury, and N. A. Welschmeyer. 1988. A novel free-living
prochlorophyte abundant in the oceanic euphotic zone. Nature
334:340--343.

Delwiche, C. F. 1999. Tracing the thread of plastid diversity through
the tapestry of life. American Naturalist 154 (Supplement): S164-S177.

Delwiche, C. F. and J. D. Palmer. 1996. Rampant horizontal transfer and
duplication of rubisco genes in eubacteria and plastids. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 13:873--882.

Delwiche, C. F. and J. D. Palmer. 1997. The origin of plastids and their
spread via secondary symbiosis. Plant Systematics and Evolution 11
(Supplement):53-86.

Delwiche, C. F., M. Kunsel, and J. D. Palmer. 1995. Phylogenetic
analysis of tufA sequences indicates a cyanobacterial origin of all
plastids. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 4:110--128.

Douglas, S. E. 1998. Plastid evolution: origins, diversity, trends.
Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 8:655-661.

Doyle, J. J. 1998. Phylogenetic perspectives on nodulation: evolving
views of plants and symbiotic bacteria. Trends in Plant Science
3:473-478.

Garrity, G. M., J. A. Bell, and T. G. Lilburn. 2004. Taxonomic Outline
of the Prokaryotes. Bergey\'s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, Second
Edition. Release 5.0.

Giovannoni, S. J., S. Turner, G. J. Olsen, S. Barns, D.J. Lane, and N.
R. Pace. 1988. Evolutionary relationship among cyanobacteria and green
chloroplasts. Journal of Bacteriology 170:3584-3592.

Gupta, R. S., P. I. Mark, C. Chandrasekera, and V. Johari. 2003.
Molecular signatures in protein sequences that are characteristic of
cyanobacteria and plastid homologues. International Journal of
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 53:1833-1842.

Honda, D., A. Yokota, and J. Sugiyama. 1999. Detection of seven major
evolutionary lineages in cyanobacteria based on the 16S rRNA gene
sequence analysis with new sequences of five marine Synechococcus
strains. Journal of Molecular Evolution 48:723-739.

Ishida, T., A. Yokota, and J. Sugiyama. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships
of filamentous cyanobacterial taxa inferred from 16S rRNA sequence
divergence. Journal of General and Applied Microbiology 43:237--241.

Jensen, T. E. 1993. Cyanobacterial ultrastructure. Pages 7-51 in
Ultrastructure of Microalgae. ( T. Berner, ed.) CRC press, Boca Raton,
Florida, USA.

Keeling, P. J. 2004. Diversity and evolutionary history of plastids and
their hosts. American Journal of Botany 91:1481-1493.

La Roche, J., G. W. M. van der Staay, F. Partensky, A. Ducret, R.
Aebersold, R. Li, S. S. Golden, R. G. Hiller, P. M. Wrench, A. W. D.
Larkum, and B. R. Green. 1996. Independent evolution of the
prochlorophyte and green plant chlorophyll a/b light-harvesting
proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA)
93:15244--15248.

Lockhart, P.J., C. J. Howe, A. C. Barbrook, A. W. D. Larkum, and D.
Penny. 1999. Spectral analysis, systematic bias, and the evolution of
chloroplasts. Molecular Biology and Evolution 16:573-576.

Morden, C. W. and S. S. Golden. 1989. psbA genes indicate common
ancestry of prochlorophytes and chloroplasts. Nature 337:382--385.

Neilan, B. A., D. Jacobs, and A. E. Goodman. 1995. Genetic diversity and
phylogeny of toxic cyanobacteria determined by DNA polymorphism within
the phycocyanin locus. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
61:3875-3883.

Nelissen, B., R. De Baere, A. Wilmotte, and R. De Wachter. 1994.
Phylogenetic relationships of nonaxenic filamentous cyanobacterial
strains based on 16S rRNA sequence analysis. Journal of Molecular
Evolution 42:194-200.

Nelissen, B., Y. Van de Peer, A. Wilmotte, and R. De Wachter. 1995. An
early origin of plastids within the cyanobacterial divergence is
suggested by evolutionary trees based on complete 16S rRNA sequences.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 12:1166-1173.

Nelissen, B., A. Wilmotte, J.-M. Neefs, and R. De Wachter. 1994.
Phylogenetic relationships among filamentous helical cyanobacteria
investigated on the basis of 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequence analysis.
Systematic and Applied Microbiology 17:206-210.

Palenik, B. and R. Haselkorn. 1992. Multiple evolutionary origins of
prochlorophytes, the chlorophyll b-containing prokaryotes. Nature
355:265-267.

Palenik, B. and H. Swift. 1996. Cyanobacterial evolution and
prochlorophyte diversity as seen in DNA-dependent RNA polymerase gene
sequences. Journal of Phycology 32:638--646.

Rai, A. N. (ed.) 1990. CRC Handbook of Symbiotic Cyanobacteria. CRC
Press Inc., Boca Raton, Florida, USA.

Rippka, R., J. Deruelles, J. B. Waterbury, M. Herdman, and R. Y.
Stanier. 1979. Generic assignments, strain histories and properties of
pure cultures of cyanobacteria. Journal of General Microbiology
111:1-61.

Shimada, A., S. Kanai, and T. Maruyama. 1995. Partial sequence of
ribulose-1,5-bisophosphate carboxylase/oxygenase and the phylogeny of
Prochloron and Prochlorococcus (Prochlorales). Journal of Molecular
Evolution 40:671--677.

Stanier, R. Y. and G. Cohen-Bazire. 1977. Phototrophic Prokaryotes: The
Cyanobacteria. Annual Review of Microbiology 31:225-274.

Stanier, R. Y. and R. Ripka. 1983. A proposed system of generic
designation based on studies on pure cultures of cyanobacteria.
Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Hydrologie 45:273-274.

Tomitani, A., K. Okada, H. Miyashita, H. C. P. Matthijs, T. Ohno, and A.
Tanaka. 1999. Chlorophyll b and phycobilins in the common ancestor of
cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Nature 400:159-162.

Turner, S. 1997. Molecular systematics of oxygenic photosynthetic
bacteria. Plant Systematics and Evolution (Supplement) 11:13-52.

Turner, S., T. Burger-Wiersma, S. J. Giovannoni, L. R. Mur, and N. R.
Pace. 1989. The relationship of a prochlorophyte Prochlorothrix
hollandica to green chloroplasts. Nature 337:380--382.

Turner, S., K. M. Pryer, V. P. W. Miao, and J. D. Palmer. 1999.
Investigating deep phylogenetic relationships among cyanobacteria and
plastids by small subunit rRNA sequence analysis. Journal of Eukaryotic
Microbiology 46:327-338.

Urbach, E., D. L. Robertson, and S. W. Chisholm. 1992. Multiple
evolutionary origins of prochlorophytes within the cyanobacterial
radiation. Nature 335:267-270.

Vonshak, A. (ed.) 1997. Spirulina platensis (Arthrospira): Physiology,
Cell-biology and Biotechnology. Taylor & Francis, London.

Whitton, B. A. 1992. Diversity, ecology, and taxonomy of the
cyano-bacteria. Pages 1-51 in Photosynthetic Prokaryotes. (N. H. Mann
and N. G. Carr, eds.) Plenum Press, New York.

Whitton, B. A. and M. Potts (eds.) 1999. Ecology of Cyanobacteria: Their
Diversity in Time and Space. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
Boston.

Wilmotte, A. and S. Golubic. 1991. Morphological and genetic criteria in
the taxonomy of Cyanophyta/Cyanobacteria. Arch. Hydrobiol. (Suppl. 92)
Algol. Stud. 64:1--24.

Wilmotte, A. and M. Herdman. 2001. Phylogenetic relationships among the
Cyanobacteria based on 16S rRNA sequences. Pages 487-493 in Bergey\'s
Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Volume 1: The Archaea and the Deeply
Branching and Phototropic Bacteria. Second Edition. G. Garrity, D. R.
Boone, and R. W. Castenholz (eds.) Springer-Verlag, New York.

Wilmotte, A., J.-M. Neefs, and R. DeWachter. 1994. Evolutionary
affiliation of the marine nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium
sp. strain NIBB 1067, derived by 16S ribosomal RNA sequence analysis.
Microbiology 140:2159-2164.

Wilmotte, A., S. Turner, Y. Van de Peer, and N. R. Pace. 1992. Taxonomic
study of marine oscillatoriacean strains (cyanobacteria) with narrow
trichomes. II. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the 16S ribosomal RNA.
Journal of Phycology 28:828-838.

Wolfe, G. R., F. X. Cunningham, D. Durnford, B. R. Green, and E. Gantt.
1994. Evidence for a common origin of chloroplasts with light-harvesting
complexes of different pigmentation. Nature 367: 566-568.

Zehr, J. P., T. M. Mellon, and W. D. Hiorns. 1997. Phylogeny of
cyanobacterial nifH genes: evolutionary implications and potential
applications to natural assemblages. Microbiology 143: 1443-1450.

##### Title Illustrations

![Fischerella ](fischerella_002.gif)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Fischerella (Eubacteria, Cyanobacteria)
  Copyright ::         © 1995 [Sue Barns](mailto:sbarns@lanl.gov) 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
![](prochloron_002.jpg)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Prochloron
  Copyright ::         © 1995 [Sue Barns](mailto:sbarns@lanl.gov) 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
![](spirulina_002.jpg)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Spirulina
  Copyright ::         © 1995 [Sue Barns](mailto:sbarns@lanl.gov) 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------