---
title: Planctomycetes
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Bacteria](../Bacteria.md)
    -   [Tree of Life](../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Eubacteria
    -   [Aquificae](Aquificae.md)
    -   [Thermotogae](Thermotogae.md)
    -   [Thermodesulfobacteria](Thermodesulfobacteria.md)
    -   [Chrysiogenes arsenatis](Chrysiogenes_arsenatis)
    -   [Nitrospira](Nitrospira.md)
    -   [Deferribacteres](Deferribacteres.md)
    -   [Chloroflexi](Chloroflexi.md)
    -   [Thermomicrobium](Thermomicrobium.md)
    -   [Fibrobacteres](Fibrobacteres.md)
    -   [Proteobacteria](Proteobacteria.md)
    -   Planctomycetes
    -   [Chlamydiae](Chlamydiae.md)
    -   [Spirochaetes](Spirochaetes.md)
    -   [Bacteroidetes](Bacteroidetes.md)
    -   [Chlorobi](Chlorobi.md)
    -   [Actinobacteria](Actinobacteria.md)
    -   [Deinococcus-Thermus](Deinococcus-Thermus.md)
    -   [Cyanobacteria](Cyanobacteria.md)
    -   [Firmicutes](Firmicutes.md)
    -   [Fusobacteria](Fusobacteria.md)
    -   [Verrucomicrobia](Verrucomicrobia.md)
    -   [Acidobacteria](Acidobacteria.md)
    -   [Dictyoglomi](Dictyoglomi.md)
    -   [Gemmatimonas aurantiaca](Gemmatimonas_aurantiaca)

-   »

# Planctomycetes 

-   *Planctomyces*
-   *Gemmata*
-   *Isosphaera*
-   *Pirellula*

Containing group: [Bacteria](../Bacteria.md)

### References

Fuerst, J. A. 1995. The planctomycetes - emerging models for microbial
ecology, evolution and cell biology. Microbiology 141:1493-1506.

Garrity, G. M., J. A. Bell, and T. G. Lilburn. 2004. Taxonomic Outline
of the Prokaryotes. Bergey\'s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, Second
Edition. Release 5.0.

Glöckner, F. O. , M. Kube, M. Bauer, H. Teeling, T. Lombardot, W.
Ludwig, D. Gade, A. Beck, K. Borzym, K. Heitmann, R. Rabus, H.
Schlesner, R. Amann, and R. Reinhardt. 2003. Complete genome sequence of
the marine planctomycete Pirellula sp. strain 1. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (USA) 100(14):8298--8303.

Griepenburg, U., N. Ward-Rainey, S. Mohamed, H. Schlesner, H. Marxsen,
F. A. Rainey, E. Stackebrandt, and G. Auling. 1999. Phylogenetic
diversity, polyamine pattern and DNA base composition of members of the
order Planctomycetales. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology
49:689-696.

Jenkins, C. and J. A. Fuerst. 2001. Phylogenetic analysis of
evolutionary relationships of the planctomycete division of the domain
bacteria based on amino acid sequences of elongation factor Tu. Journal
of Molecular Evolution 52:405-418.

Lindsay, M. R., R. I. Webb, M. Strous, M. S. Jetten, M. K. Butler, R. J.
Forde, and J. A. Fuerst. 2001. Cell compartmentalisation in
planctomycetes: novel types of structural organisation for the bacterial
cell. Archives of Microbiology 175:413-429.

Ward, N. L., F. A. Rainey, B. P. Hedlund, J. T. Staley, W. Ludwig, and
E. Stackebrandt. 2000. Comparative phylogenetic analyses of members of
the order Planctomycetales and the division Verrucomicrobia: 23S rRNA
gene sequence analysis supports the 16S rRNA gene sequence-derived
phylogeny. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary
Microbiology 50:1965-1972.