---
title: Cnidaria
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Animals
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Myxozoa](Myxozoa)
    -   Cnidaria
    -   [Ctenophora](Ctenophora)
    -   [Placozoa](Placozoa)
    -   [Porifera](Porifera)

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Anthozoa](Anthozoa.md)

# Cnidaria

## Sea anemones, corals, jellyfish, sea pens, hydra 

[Daphne G. Fautin and Sandra L. Romano](#AboutThisPage)

![ ](malu_002.jpg)
![ ](aglantha.gif)

Tree following Werner (1973) and Bridge et al. (1995).

Containing group: [Animals](Animals.md)

### Information on the Internet

[Cnidaria Home Page](http://www.ucihs.uci.edu/biochem/steele/default.html). University
of California, Irvine.

### Introduction

The exclusively aquatic phylum Cnidaria is represented by polyps such as
sea anemones and corals, and by medusae such as jellyfish. A polypoid or
a medusoid cnidarian is a radially or biradially symmetrical,
uncephalized animal with a single body opening, the mouth. The mouth is
surrounded by tentacles studded with microscopic stinging capsules known
as nematocysts that are the agents of offense and defense. The
possession of intrinsic nematocysts is the defining characteristic of
the phylum (Hessinger and Lenhoff 1988); nematocysts are the most
diverse and widespread of three types of cnidae (cnidos = thread) \--
hence the preferred name of the phylum.

Cnidarians are diploblastic \-- that is, the body and tentacles consist
of two cell layers, the endoderm (sometimes referred to as the
gastrodermis) and the ectoderm (the epidermis). Between the two cell
layers is the mesoglea, which ranges from little more than a glue to
bind the layers (for example, in Hydra) to the vast bulk of the animal
(for example, in jellyfish of Class Scyphozoa). The body encompasses a
single sac-like body space, the coelenteron (koilos = cavity; enteron =
intestine), which communicates with the surrounding medium through the
mouth. The less preferred name of the phylum, Coelenterata, is based on
this attribute. The coelenteron (also termed the gastrovascular cavity)
serves for gas exchange and digestion.

All cnidarians are carnivorous, with cnidae and tentacles active in prey
capture. Because polyps are typically sessile, and only some medusae
possess sensory structures (the most sophisticated occur in the Cubozoa;
Pearse and Pearse 1978), cnidarians are generally believed to be passive
predators, feeding on prey items that blunder into their tentacles. Some
cnidarians can absorb dissolved organic matter directly from seawater
(e.g. Schlichter 1975), but it is not known how widespread this ability
is. Living within the tissues of anthozoans of many species and
hydrozoans and scyphozoans of a small number of species are unicellular
algae from which the animals derive reduced carbon (Shick 1991).
Dinoflagellate symbionts, termed zooxanthellae, are by far the most
common algal symbionts; they are exclusively marine. Green algal
symbionts, termed zoochlorellae, occur in both marine and freshwater
cnidarians.

The text-book depiction of the typical cnidarian life cycle is an
alternation between a medusa and a polyp (termed metagenesis), the
former the sexually reproductive stage and the latter the asexual stage.
In fact, an attribute of the entire class Anthozoa is the absence of a
medusa. At least some individuals of all anthozoan species form gametes;
those of some species may reproduce vegetatively as well. The other
three classes \-- Cubozoa, Hydrozoa, and Scyphozoa \-- are often grouped
as the \"Medusozoa\" because the medusa phase is present in them all.
Indeed, the medusa dominates the life cycle of members of the classes
Cubozoa and Scyphozoa (Cubozoa was formerly considered an order of
Scyphozoa, and some specialists still consider it as such). Life cycles
of the Hydrozoa are the most diverse in the phylum: although the polyp
is the more conspicuous and persistent stage in most taxa, some lack the
medusa phase, whereas others lack the polyp phase. Hydra, which is used
in many textbooks to illustrate the phylum, is utterly atypical: a
hydrozoan, it lacks a medusa, it has aggregations of gametogenic tissue
that function as gonads, and it is among only a handful of freshwater
cnidarian species.

The cnidarian larva is the planula, a pear-shaped, entirely ciliated
animal. In the \"typical\" cnidarian life cycle, male and female medusae
spawn freely into the sea, where fertilization occurs and a planula
develops. At metamorphosis, the planula settles on and attaches to the
substratum, where it metamorphoses into a polyp. The primary polyp
produces additional polyps asexually, by budding, stolonic outgrowth, or
some other process, to form a clone or a colony. At the appropriate
time, determined perhaps by size of the colony or environmental
conditions, rather than or in addition to polyps, medusae are produced
asexually (in Cubozoa, each polyp metamorphoses into a medusa). They are
released to take up a pelagic existence and the cycle begins anew.

![ ](reproduction.gif)

Idealized lifecycle of the Cnidaria.

### Characteristics

The cnida, or nematocyst, which is the sine qua non of the phylum, is
secreted by the Golgi apparatus of a cell termed a cnidoblast (Watson
1988). A cnida therefore is technically not an organelle, but, rather,
the most complex secretory product known. Upon receiving the appropriate
physical and/or chemical stimulus, a cnida fires, everting a tubule many
times the length of the capsule. The tubule may deliver a toxin, may
stick to a prey item, or may entangle an object, depending on the type
of cnida. A cnida can fire but once. There are three major types of
cnidae: nematocysts, spirocysts, and ptychocysts. Nematocysts occur in
all classes of Cnidaria, but some of the 30-plus varieties of
nematocysts are restricted to members of certain classes (Fautin and
Mariscal 1991). Spirocysts are found only in Anthozoa; they are adhesive
in nature. Ptychocysts are the most taxonomically restricted in
distribution, occurring only in the anthozoan order Ceriantharia; their
function is to entangle bits of mud among their robust tubules to form
the feltwork that constitutes the tube of these burrowing animals.

![ ](basitrichs250.jpg)

**Left:** Fired \"basitrich\" (basitrichous isorhiza) from a sea
anemone. The now empty capsule is in the lower right of the photo; the
spiny basal part of the fired tubule extends to the upper left; beyond
the frame of the photo is the non-spiny, distal part of the tubule,
which is many times longer than the capsule. **Middle:** \"Holotrich\"
(holotrichous isorhiza) from a corallimorpharian. **Right:** Unfired
\"basitrichs\" (basitrichous isorhizas) from a sea anemone. The
longitudinal line inside each capsule is the spiny basal part of the
unfired tubule.

Two body forms are characteristic of cnidarians \-- the polyp and the
medusa. With a few exceptions, a columnar polyp is sedentary, being
attached to or burrowed into the substratum by the end opposite the
mouth. Thus its tentacles are typically considered to point upward and
outward. Polyps of some species propagate vegetatively, forming colonies
(if the progeny remain attached to one another) or clones (if the
progeny separate). Polymorphism occurs in colonies of some species of
hydrozoans and anthozoans, the polyps being specialized for functions
such as feeding, defense, and sexual reproduction. Polyps of some taxa
form a skeleton within or external to their tissues; some skeletons are
mineralic (of calcium carbonate), others are organic (of chitin or
another carbohydrate), and some are both. The spheroidal or discoidal
medusae are solitary, and those of most species are pelagic. Although
typically depicted as living with mouth and tentacles pointing down,
medusae assume all orientations in the water. Medusae of few species
possess the ability to propagate vegetatively. The common name of
medusae, jellyfish, alludes to the massive amount of mesoglea that
contributes to their buoyancy.

All cnidarians have hydrostatic skeletons, regardless of whether they
also have mineralic and/or organic exoskeletons or endoskeletons. The
muscles of the body wall operate against the fluid in the coelenteron to
extend individual polyps and to effect the swimming of medusae, for
example. The hollow tentacles of anthozoans are extended through
hydrostatic action as well.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Cnidaria is thought to have one of the longest fossil histories of
metazoan phlya with representatives in the Ediacaran fauna of the late
Precambrian (Scrutton 1979). These earliest fossils are both medusoid
and polypoid, and thought to represent all cnidarian classes (Scrutton
1979).

The four extant cnidarian classes are identifiable as early as the
Ordovician (Robson 1985), but evolutionary relationships among them have
been the subject of much debate (e.g. Brooks 1886, Hyman 1940, Jagersten
1955, Hand 1959, Pantin 1960, Werner 1973, Petersen 1979, Barnes 1987,
Ax 1989). Anthozoa is alternatively considered the most basal or the
most derived group. The former hypothesis posits that the polyp is the
original body form, with the medusa (and metagenesis) being derived
(Fig. 1A). The latter perspective is that, in the \"typical\" life
cycle, the medusa is gametogenic, and so constitutes the definitive, or
adult, stage, with the polyp being a persistent larva. Thus, it is
reasoned, the polyp evolved secondarily, and loss of the original body
form, the medusa, places Anthozoa as the most derived taxon (Fig. 1B). A
comprehensive morphological cladistic analysis by Schuchert (1993)
supports the basal position of Anthozoa with the Scyphozoa and Cubozoa
being more closely related to each other than to Hydrozoa.
Morphological, mtDNA, and 18S rDNA data separately and together also
support the basal position of Anthozoa but do not resolve the
relationships among Scyphozoa, Cubozoa and Hydrozoa (Bridge et al.
1995). The phylogenetic tree at the beginning of this page is that of
Bridge et al. (1995). Neither of these treatments attempts to include
the extinct class Conulata, which has been considered by most
paleontologists to be related to the Scyphozoa.

![ ](bridge.gif)

Alternative views of cnidarian life-cycle evolution and systematic
relationships. (After Bridge et al. 1995.)

Their diploblastic structure and their single body opening and cavity
had been thought to ally cnidarians with ctenophores. Indeed, until
relatively recently the phylum Coelenterata was considered to include
animals now placed in Cnidaria and Ctenophora. However, ctenophores lack
a metagenetic life cycle and cnidae. Cnidae have been found in one
ctenophore, but it is now known that the ctenophore acquires those
cnidae from the hydromedusae upon which it preys (Mills and Miller
1984). Thus, it is generally agreed that the similarity in body form
between pelagic ctenophores and pelagic cnidarians is convergent;
benthic ctenophores do not resemble cnidarians at all. Cnidaria,
therefore, is a well circumscribed taxon; it is considered by many to be
a sister group of all metazoans other than sponges.

### References

Ax, P. 1989. Basic phylogenetic systematization of Metazoa. Pp. 453-470
in K. B. B. Fernholm and H. Jornvall (eds.). The Hierarchy of Life.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Bridge, D., C. W. Cunningham, R. DeSalle, and L. W. Buss. 1995.
Class-level relationships in the phylum Cnidaria: Molecular and
morphological evidence. Molec. Biol. Evol. 12:679-689.

Bridge, D., C. W. Cunningham, B. Schierwater, R. DeSalle, and L. W.

Buss. 1992. Class-level relationships in the phylum Cnidaria: Evidence
from mitochondrial genome structure. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA
89:8750-8753.

Brusca, C. B. and G. J. Brusca. 1990. Invertebrates. Sinauer Associates,
Sunderland MA.

Dunn, D. F. 1982. Cnidaria. Pp. 669-705 in S. P. Parker (ed.) Synopsis
and Classification of Living organisms. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Fautin, D. G. and R. N. Mariscal. 1991. Cnidaria: Anthozoa. Pp. 267-358
in F. W. Harrison and J. A. Westfall (eds.) Microscopic Anatomy of
Invertebrates, volume 2: Placozoa, Porifera, Cnidaria, and Ctenophora.
Wiley-Liss, New York and other cities.

Hand, C. 1959. On the origin and phylogeny of the Coelenterata. Syst.
Zool. 8:192-202.

Hessinger, D. A. and H. M. Lenhoff. 1988. Preface. Pp. xi-xii in D. A.
Hessinger and H. M. Lenhoff (eds.) The Biology of Nematocysts. Academic
Press, San Diego and other cities.

Hill, D. and J. W. Wells. 1956. Cnidaria \-- general features. Pp. F5-F9
in R. C. Moore (ed.) Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology: Part F,
Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of Kansas
Press.

Hyman, L. H. 1940. The Invertebrates: Protozoa through Ctenophora.
McGraw-Hill, New York. 726 pp.

Hyman, L. H. 1956. Morphology of living coelenterates. Pp. F10-F20 in R.
C. Moore (ed.) Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology: Part F,
Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of Kansas
Press.

Jagersten, G. 1955. On the early phylogeny of the Metazoa: the
bilaterogastraea theory. Zool. Bidr. Uppsala 30: 321-354.

Mackie, G. O. (ed.). 1976. Coelenterate Ecology and Behavior (Selected
papers from the Third International Symposium on Coelenterate Biology,
held at the University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, May
10-13, 1976). Plenum Press, New York and London. 744 pp.

Meglitsch, P. A. and F. R. Schram. 1991. Invertebrate Zoology (3rd ed.).
Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford. 623 pp.

Mills, C. E. and R. L. Miller. 1984. Ingestion of a medusa (Aegina
citrea) by the nematocyst-containing ctenophore Haeckelia rubra
(formerly Euchlora rubra): phylogenetic implications. Mar. Biol.
78:215-221.

Muscatine, L. and H. M. Lenhoff (eds.). 1974. Coelenterate Biology:
Reviews and New Perspectives. Academic Press, New York and other cities.
501 pp.

Nielsen, C. 1995. Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the Living
Phyla. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 467 pp.

Pantin, C. 1960. Diploblastic animals. Proc. Linn. Soc.171:1-14.

Pearse, J. S. and V. B. Pearse. 1978. Vision in cubomedusan jellyfishes.
Science 199: 458.

Pearse, V., J. Pearse, M. Buchsbaum, and R. Buchsbaum. 1986. Living
Invertebrates. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Palo Alto, CA. 848 pp.

Petersen, K. W. 1979. Development of coloniality in Hydrozoa. Pp.
105-139 in G. Larwood and B. R. Rosen (eds.). Biology and Systematics of
Colonial Organisms. Academic Press, New York.

Rees, W. J. (ed.). 1966. The Cnidaria and their Evolution (The
Proceedings of a Symposium held at The Zoological Society of London on 3
and 4 March 1965). Zoological Society of London and Academic Press,
London and other cities. 449 pp.

Robson, E. A. 1985. Speculations on coelenterates. Pp. 60-77 in S.
Conway Morris, J. D. George, R. Gibson, and H. M. Platt (eds). The
Origins and Relationships of Lower Invertebrates. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.

Ruppert, E. E. and R. D. Barnes. 1994. Invertebrate Zoology (6th ed.).
Harcourt Brace College Publishers, Fort Worth. 1056 pp.

Schlichter, D. 1975. The importance of dissolved organic compounds in
sea water for the nutrition of Anemonia sulcata Pennant (Coelenterata).
Pp. 395-405 in H. Barnes (ed.). Proceedings of the 9th European Marine
Biolological Symposium.

Schuchert, P. 1993. Phylogenetic analysis of the Cnidaria. Z. Zool.
Syst. Evolut.-forsch. 31:161-173.

Scrutton, C. T. 1979. Early Fossil Cnidarians. Pp. 161-207 in M. R.
House (ed.) The Origin of Major Invertebrate Groups. Academic Press,
London.

Shick, J. M. 1991. A Functional Biology of Sea Anemones. Chapman and
Hall, London and other cities. 395 pp.

Tardent, P. and R. Tardent (eds.). 1980. Developmental and Cellular
Biology of Coelenterates (Proceedings of the 4th International
Coelenterate Conference held in Interlaken, Switzerland, 4-8 September,
1979). Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam and other
cities. 499 pp.

Tokioka, T. and S. Nishimura (eds). 1973. Proceedings of the Second
International Symposium on Cnidaria. Publ. Seto Mar. Biol. Lab.
20:1-793.

Watson, G. M. 1988. Ultrastructure and cytochemistry of developing
nematocysts. Pp. 143-164 in D. A. Hessinger and H. M. Lenhoff (eds.) The
Biology of Nematocysts. Academic Press, San Diego and other cities.

Werner, B. 1973. New investigations on systematics and evolution of the
class Scyphozoa and the phylum Cnidaria. Publ. Seto Mar. Biol. Lab.
(Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Cnidaria)
20:35-61.

Williams, R. B., P. F. S. Cornelius, R. G. Hughes, and E. A. Robson
(eds.). 1991. Coelenterate Biology: Recent Research on Cnidaria and
Ctenophora (Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Coelenterate Biology, 1989). Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht and
other cities. 742 pp.

##### Title Illustrations

![](malu.jpg)

  --------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Heteractis malu
  Comments             A sea anemone (Anthozoa)
  Reference            From D. G. Fautin and G. R. Allen. 1992. Field Guide to Anemonefishes and their Host Sea Anemones. Western Australia Museum.
  Creator              photographed by Art Reed
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © 1992 Western Australia Museum
  --------------------------------------------
![](aglantha_002.gif)

  ---------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Aglantha digitale
  Comments          A direct-developing holoplanktonic hydromedusa (Hydrozoa) that has no polyp. The gonads are visible through the transparent bell.
  Copyright ::         © 1998 [Claudia E. Mills](http://faculty.washington.edu/cemills/)
  ---------------------------------------------