---
title: Ctenophora
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Animals
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Myxozoa](Myxozoa)
    -   [Cnidaria](Cnidaria)
    -   Ctenophora
    -   [Placozoa](Placozoa)
    -   [Porifera](Porifera)

-   »

# Ctenophora

## Comb Jellies 

![ ](mnemiopsis_002.gif)

Tree after Podar et al. 2001 and Harbison 1985.

Containing group: [Animals](Animals.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [Introduction to the     Ctenophora](http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/cnidaria/ctenophora.html).
    UCMP Berkeley.
-   [Phylum Ctenophora: list of all valid species     names](http://faculty.washington.edu/cemills/Ctenophores.html).
    Maintained by Claudia Mills.
-   [Comb     Jellies](http://www.microscopy-uk.org.uk/mag/artmay98/comb.html). A
    micscape article by Wim van Egmond.
-   [The JelliesZone](http://jellieszone.com/). A page about gelatinous
    zooplankton provided by David Wrobel.
-   [Steven Haddock\'s Pictures of     Plankton](http://lifesci.ucsb.edu/%7Ehaddock/plankton/). Ctenophores
    and more.
-   The [Photo     Gallery](http://lifesci.ucsb.edu/%7Ebiolum/organism/photo.html) of
    the [Bioluminescence Web Page](http://lifesci.ucsb.edu/%7Ebiolum/)
    also has some great pictures of ctenophores.
-   [Ctenophora](http://scilib.ucsd.edu/sio/nsf/fguide/ctenophora.html).
    Part of the [Underwater Field Guide to Ross Island & McMurdo Sound,     Antarctica](http://scilib.ucsd.edu/sio/nsf/fguide/).
-   [Ctenophora of the Black     Sea](http://www.ibss.iuf.net/blacksea/species/freelife/ctenophora.html).
    Part of the [Biodiversity of the Black Sea     Project](http://www.ibss.iuf.net/blacksea/bsindex.html). Institute
    of Biology of the Southern Seas, National Academy of Sciences of
    Ukraine.

### References

Carre, C. and D. Carre. 1989. Haeckelia bimaculata sp. nov., a new
species of ctenophore (Cydippida, Haeckeliidae) from the Mediterranean
with cnidocysts and pseudocolloblasts. Comptes Rendus de l\'Academie des
Sciences Serie III-Sciences De La Vie 308:321-327.

Carre, C. and D. Carre. 1993. Ctenella aurantia, new genus and new
species of mediterranean tentacled ctenophore (Ctenellidae fam. nov.)
without colloblasts, but with labial suckers. Canadian Journal of
Zoology 71:1804-1810.

Costello, J. H. and R. Coverdale. 1998. Planktonic feeding and
evolutionary significance of the lobate body plan within the ctenophora.
Biological Bulletin 195:247-248.

Haddock, S. H. D. and J. F. Case. 1995. Not all ctenophores are
bioluminescent: Pleurobrachia. Biological Bulletin 189:356-362.

Harbison, G. R. 1985. On the classification and evolution of the
Ctenophora. Pages 78-100 in The Origins and Relationships of Lower
Invertebrates. (S. C. Morris, J. D. George, R. Gibson and H. M. Platt,
eds.). Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Harbison, G. R., L. P. Madin, and N. R. Swanberg. 1978. Natural history
and distribution of oceanic ctenophores. Deep-Sea Research 25:233-256.

Harbison, G. R. and R. L. Miller. 1986. Not all ctenophores are
hermaphrodites. Studies on the systematics, distribution, sexuality and
development of two species of Ocyropsis. Marine Biology 90:413-424.

Martindale, M. Q. and J. Q. Henry. 1997. Ctenophora. Pages 87--115 in
Embryology: Constructing the Organism. S. F. Gilbert and A. M. Raunio
(eds.) Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.

Martindale, M. Q. and J. Q. Henry. 1999. Intracellular fate mapping in a
basal metazoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, reveals the origins of
mesoderm and the existence of indeterminate cell lineages. Developmental
Biology 214:243-257.

Matsumoto, G. I. and G. R. Harbison. 1993. In situ observations of
foraging, feeding, and escape behavior in three orders of oceanic
ctenophores: Lobata, Cestida, and Beroida. Marine Biology 117:279-287.

Mills, C.E. 1987. Revised classification of the genus Euplokamis Chun,
1880 (Ctenophora: Cydippida: Euplokamidae n. fam.), with a description
of the new species Euplokamis dunlapae. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 65:
2661-2668.

Mills, C. E. 1987. Key to the phylum Ctenophora. Pages 79-81 in Marine
Invertebrates of the Pacific Northwest. (E. N. Kozloff, ed.) University
of Washington Press, Seattle.

Mills, C. E. and R. L. Miller. 1984. Ingestion of a medusae (Aegina
citrea) by the nematocyst-containing ctenophore Haekelia rubra (formerly
Euchlora rubra): phylogenetic implications. Marine Biology 78:215-221.

Mills, C. E., P. R. Pugh, G. R. Harbison, and S. H. D. Haddock. (1996)
Medusae, siphonophores and ctenophores of the Alborán Sea, south western
Mediterranean. Scientia Marina 60: 145-163.

Morris, S. C.and D. H. Collins. 1996. Middle cambrian ctenophores from
the Stephen Formation, British Columbia, Canada. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B 351:279-308.

Pianka, H. D. 1974. Ctenophora. Pages 201-265 in Reproduction of Marine
Invertebrates, Volume I: Acoelomate and Pseudocoelomate Metazoans. (A.
C. Giese and J. S. Pearse, eds.) Academic Press, New York.

Podar, M., S. H. D. Haddock, M. L. Sogin and G. R. Harbison. 2001. A
molecular phylogenetic framework for the phylum Ctenophora using 18S
rRNA genes. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 21:218--230.

Stanley, G. D. and W. Stürmer. 1983. The first fossil ctenophore from
the lower devonian of West Germany. Nature 303:518-520.

Stanley, G. D. and W. Stürmer. 1987. A new fossil ctenophore discovered
by X-rays. Nature 328:61-63.

##### Title Illustrations

![](mnemiopsis.gif)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::   Mnemiopsis
  Acknowledgements   Photograph from Gray Museum Slide Collection
  Copyright ::          © 1995 [Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole](http://www.mbl.edu/) 
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------