---
title: Myxozoa
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Animals
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   Myxozoa
    -   [Cnidaria](Cnidaria)
    -   [Ctenophora](Ctenophora)
    -   [Placozoa](Placozoa)
    -   [Porifera](Porifera)

-   »

# Myxozoa 

-   *Malacosporea* [(Malacovalvulida)]
    -   *Buddenbrockia plumatellae* [(Tetracapsula
        bryozoides)]
    -   *Tetracapsuloides bryosalmonae* [(Tetracapsula
        bryosalmonae)]
-   *Myxosporea*
    -   *Multivalvulida*
    -   *Bivalvulida*
        -   *Platysporina*
        -   *Variisporina*
        -   *Sphaeromyxina*

Classification after Kent et al. 2001 and Canning et al. 2002.

Containing group: [Animals](Animals.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [Myxozoan Network](http://www.iats.csic.es/%7Epatolog2/index.htm). A
    network for scientists involved with myxozoan research.

### References

Anderson, C. L. 1998. Phylogenetic relationships of the Myxozoa. Pages
341--350 in: Evolutionary Relationships among Protozoa. G. H. Coombs, K.
Vickerman, M. A. Sleigh and A. Warren, eds. Chapman & Hall, London.

Anderson, C. L., E. U. Canning and B. Okamura. 1998. A triploblast
origin for Myxozoa? Nature392:346.

Anderson, C. L., E. U. Canning and B. Okamura. 1999. Molecular data
implicate bryozoans as hosts for PKX (Phylum Myxozoa) and identify a
clade of bryozoan parasites within the Myxozoa. Parasitology
119(6):555-561.

Canning, E. U., A. Curry, S. W. Feist, M. Longshaw, and B. Okamura.
2000. A new class and order of myxozoans to accommodate parasites of
bryozoans with ultrastructural observations on Tetracapsula bryosalmonae
(PKX organism). Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology 47:456?468.

Canning, E. U. and B. Okamura. 2004. Biodiversity and evolution of the
myxozoa. Advances in Parasitology 56:43-131.

Canning E. U., S. Tops, A. Curry, T. S. Wood, and B. Okamura. 2002.
Ecology, development and pathogenicity of Buddenbrockia plumatellae
Schröder, 1910 (Myxozoa, Malacosporea) (syn. Tetracapsula bryozoides)
and establishment of Tetracapsuloides n. gen. for Tetracapsula
bryosalmonae. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology 49(4):280-295.

Kent, M. L., K. B.Andree, J. L.Bartholomew, M.El-Matbouli, S. S.Desser,
R. H.Devlin, S. W.Feist, R. P.Hedrick, R. W.Hoffmann, J.Khattra, S.
L.Hallett, R. J. G.Lester, M.Longshaw, O.Palenzeula, M. E.Siddall, and
C.Xiao. 2001. Recent advances in our knowledge of the Myxozoa. Journal
of Eukaryotic Microbiology 48:395-413.

Monteiro, A. S., B. Okamura, and P. W. H. Holland. 2002. Orphan worm
finds a home: Buddenbrockia is a Myxozoan. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 19:968-971.

Okamura, B. and E. U. Canning. 2003. Orphan worms and, homeless
parasites enhance bilaterian diversity. Trends in Ecology and Evolution
18(12):633-639.

Okamura, B., A. Curry, T. S. Wood and E. U. Canning. 2002.
Ultrastructure of Buddenbrockia identifies it as a myxozoan and verifies
the bilaterian origin of the Myxozoa. Parasitology 124:215-223.

Schlegel, M., J. Lom, A. Stechmann, D. Bernhard, D. Leipe, I. Dyková,
and M. L. Sogin. 1996. Phylogenetic analysis of complete small subunit
ribosomal RNA coding region of Myxidium lieberkuehni: evidence that
Myxozoa are Metazoa and related to the Bilateria. Archiv für
Protistenkunde 147:1--9.

Siddall, M. E., D. S. Martin, D. Bridge, S. S. Desser, and D. K. Cone.
1995. The demise of a phylum of protists: phylogeny of the Myxozoa and
other parasitic cnidaria. Journal of Parasitology 81:961--967.

Siddall, M. E. and M. F. Whiting. 1999. Long-branch abstractions.
Cladistics 15:9--24.

Smothers, J. F., C. D. von Dohlen, L. H. Smith, Jr., and R. D. Spall.
1994. Molecular evidence that the myxozoan protists are metazoans.
Science 265:1719--1721.

Xiao, C. and S. S. Desser. 2000. Cladistic analysis of myxozoan species
with known alternating life-cycles. Systematic Parasitology 46:81--91.

Whipps, C. M., G. Grossel, R. D. Adlard, H. Yokoyama, M. S. Bryant, B.
L. Munday, and M. L. Kent. 2004. Phylogeny of the multivalvulidae
(Myxozoa : Myxosporea) based on comparative ribosomal DNA sequence
analysis. Journal of Parasitology 90 (3):618-622.

Zrzavy, J. 2001. The interrelationships of metazoan parasites: a review
of phylum- and higher-level hypotheses from recent morphological and
molecular phylogenetic analyses. Folia Parasitologica 48:81-103.

Zrzavy, J. and V. Hypsa. 2003. Myxozoa, Polypodium, and the origin of
the Bilateria: The phylogenetic position of \"Endocnidozoa\" in light of
the rediscovery of Buddenbrockia. Cladistics 19(2):164-169.