---
aliases:
has_id_wikidata: Q10806
MeSH_tree_code:
  - K01.400.504.984.500
  - I01.198.240.856.800.750
  - I01.880.735.950.250.860
hashtag:
  - NeverForget
  - NeverForget911
  - September11
  - September11th
  - 9/11
  - 911Attack
Commons_category: September 11 attacks
DPLA_subject_term:
  - September 11 Terrorist Attacks (2001)
  - September 11 Terrorist Attacks, 2001
  - September 11, Terrorist Attacks, 2001
point_in_time: 2001-09-11T00:00:00Z
Know_Your_Meme_slug: september-11th-2001-attacks
different_from: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~911,83119]]"
location:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Arlington_County,107126]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Shanksville,648503]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Manhattan,11299]]"
armament: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~airliner,210932]]"
instance_of:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~suicide_attack,217327]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~mass_murder,750215]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~aircraft_hijacking,898712]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~terrorist_attack,2223653]]"
has_effect:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Patriot_Act,221689]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~airport_security_repercussions_due_to_the_September_11_attacks,4698977]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~District_of_Columbia_Police_Coordination_Amendment_Act_of_2001,5283428]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~No_Fly_List,10952676]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~United_States_Department_of_Homeland_Security,11231]]"
located_in_time_zone: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Eastern_Time_Zone,941023]]"
topic_has_template: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Template_September_11_attacks,6150598]]"
Wikimedia_outline: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~outline_of_the_September_11_attacks,7112782]]"
part_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~terrorism_in_the_United_States,7703957]]"
topic_s_main_Wikimedia_portal: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Portal_September_11_attacks,24712259]]"
depicted_by: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Memoria_e_Luce,126181694]]"
organizer: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Saudi_Arabia,851]]"
target:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~The_Pentagon,11208]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~World_Trade_Center,11235]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~White_House,35525]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~United_States_Capitol,54109]]"
country: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~United_States,30]]"
number_of_perpetrators: 19
number_of_injured: 25000
perpetrator: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Al_Qaeda,34490]]"
number_of_deaths: 2996
RIA_Novosti_reference: "41362023"
booru_tag: 9/11
Danbooru_tag: 9/11
image: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/North%20face%20south%20tower%20after%20plane%20strike%209-11.jpg
NOTAM_FAA_: 1/0373
spoken_text_audio: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/En-September-11-attacks.ogg
montage_image: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/September%2011%20Photo%20Montage.jpg
exact_match: http://wordnet-rdf.princeton.edu/pwn30/15300051-n
U_S_National_Archives_Identifier: "10674947"
UMLS_CUI: C1449772
Library_of_Congress_Classification: HV6432.7
---

# [[2001-09-11_Attacks]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[WD~September_11_attacks,10806]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> The September 11 attacks, also known as 9/11, 
> were four coordinated Islamist terrorist suicide attacks 
> by al-Qaeda against the United States in 2001. 
> 
> Nineteen terrorists hijacked four commercial airliners, 
> then flew one into each of the Twin Towers at the World Trade Center in New York City, 
> and another into the Pentagon, 
> the headquarters of the U.S. Department of Defense, in Arlington County, Virginia. 
> The fourth plane crashed in a rural Pennsylvania field during a passenger revolt. 
> 
> In response to the attacks, the United States waged the global war on terror over decades, 
> to eliminate hostile groups deemed terrorist organizations, and the governments purported to support them.
>
> Ringleader Mohamed Atta flew American Airlines Flight 11 
> into the North Tower of the World Trade Center complex at 8:46 a.m. 
> Seventeen minutes later at 9:03 a.m., United Airlines Flight 175 hit the South Tower. 
> Both collapsed within an hour and forty-two minutes, 
> destroying the remaining five structures in the complex. 
> 
> American Airlines Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon at 9:37 a.m., causing a partial collapse. 
> The fourth and final flight, United Airlines Flight 93, 
> was believed by investigators to target either the United States Capitol or the White House. 
> 
> Alerted to the previous attacks, the passengers revolted against the hijackers 
> who crashed the aircraft into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, at 10:03 a.m. 
> 
> The Federal Aviation Administration ordered 
> an indefinite ground stop for all air traffic in U.S. airspace, 
> preventing any further aircraft departures until September 13 
> and requiring all airborne aircraft to return to their point of origin or divert to Canada. 
> 
> The actions undertaken in Canada to support incoming aircraft and their occupants 
> were collectively titled Operation Yellow Ribbon.
>
> That evening, the Central Intelligence Agency informed President George W. Bush 
> that its Counterterrorism Center had identified the attacks 
> as having been the work of al-Qaeda under Osama bin Laden. 
> 
> The United States responded by launching the war on terror 
> and invading Afghanistan to depose the Taliban, 
> which rejected U.S. terms to expel al-Qaeda from Afghanistan and extradite its leaders. 
> 
> NATO's invocation of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty—its only usage to date—
> called upon allies to fight al-Qaeda. 
> 
> As U.S. and allied invasion forces swept through Afghanistan, bin Laden eluded them. 
> He denied any involvement until 2004, when excerpts of a taped statement in which 
> he accepted responsibility for the attacks were released. 
> 
> Al-Qaeda's cited motivations included U.S. support of Israel, 
> the presence of U.S. military bases in Saudi Arabia and sanctions against Iraq. 
> 
> The nearly decade-long manhunt for bin Laden concluded in May 2011, 
> when he was killed during a U.S. military raid on his compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan. 
> 
> The war in Afghanistan continued for another eight years until the agreement was made 
> in February 2020 for American and NATO troops to withdraw from the country.
>
> The attacks killed 2,977 people, injured thousands more 
> and gave rise to substantial long-term health consequences 
> while also causing at least US$10 billion in infrastructure and property damage. 
> 
> It remains the deadliest terrorist attack in history, 
> as well as the deadliest incident for firefighters and law enforcement personnel 
> in American history, killing 343 and 72 members, respectively. 
> 
> The crashes of Flight 11 and Flight 175 were the deadliest aviation disasters of all time, 
> and the collision of Flight 77 with the Pentagon resulted in the 
> fourth-highest number of ground fatalities in a plane crash in history. 
> 
> The destruction of the World Trade Center and its environs, 
> located in Manhattan's Financial District, seriously harmed the U.S. economy 
> and induced global market shocks. 
> 
> Many other countries strengthened anti-terrorism legislation 
> and expanded their powers of law enforcement and intelligence agencies. 
> 
> The total number of deaths caused by the attacks, 
> combined with the death tolls from the conflicts they directly incited, 
> has been estimated by the Costs of War Project to be over 4.5 million.
>
> Cleanup of the World Trade Center site (colloquially "Ground Zero") was completed in May 2002, 
> while the Pentagon was repaired within a year. 
> 
> After delays in the design of a replacement complex, 
> six new buildings were planned to replace the lost towers, along with a museum 
> and memorial dedicated to those who were killed or injured in the attacks. 
> 
> The tallest building, One World Trade Center, began construction in 2006, opening in 2014. 
> Memorials to the attacks include the National September 11 Memorial & Museum in New York City, the Pentagon Memorial in Arlington County, Virginia, and the Flight 93 National Memorial at the Pennsylvania crash site.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/September%2011%20attacks)  

