---
aliases:
  - Wasserwelle
  - Wind_Wave
  - Wind Wave
has_id_wikidata: Q165848
subclass_of: "[[../../../../WikiData/WD~surface_wave,889796]]"
described_by_source:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Great_Complete_Encyclopedia_of_All_Sciences_and_Arts,1547546]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Metropolitan_Museum_of_Art_Tagging_Vocabulary,106727050]]"
produced_sound: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Q110068397,110068397]]"
location: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~body_of_water,15324]]"
OmegaWiki_Defined_Meaning: 4133
image: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/Porto%20Covo%20July%202011-6.jpg
Dewey_Decimal_Classification: 551.463
Unicode_character: 🌊
subreddit: HeavySeas
Commons_category: Water waves
---

# [[Wind_Wave]] 🌊 

#is_/same_as :: [[../../../../WikiData/WD~Wind_wave,165848|WD~Wind_wave,165848]]  

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> In fluid dynamics, a wind wave, or wind-generated water wave, 
> is a surface wave that occurs on the free surface of bodies of water 
> as a result of the wind blowing over the water's surface. 
> 
> The contact distance in the direction of the wind is known as the fetch. 
> Waves in the oceans can travel thousands of kilometers before reaching land. 
> Wind waves on Earth range in size from small ripples to waves over 30 m high, 
> being limited by wind speed, duration, fetch, and water depth.
>
> When directly generated and affected by local wind, 
> a wind wave system is called a wind sea. 
> 
> Wind waves will travel in a great circle route after being generated – 
> curving slightly left in the southern hemisphere 
> and slightly right in the northern hemisphere. 
> 
> After moving out of the area of fetch and no longer being affected by the local wind, 
> wind waves are called swells and can travel thousands of kilometers. 
> A noteworthy example of this is waves generated south of Tasmania 
> during heavy winds that will travel across the Pacific to southern California, 
> producing desirable surfing conditions. 
> 
> Wind waves in the ocean are also called ocean surface waves 
> and are **mainly gravity waves**, where gravity is the main equilibrium force.
>
> Wind waves have a certain amount of randomness: 
> subsequent waves differ in height, duration, and shape with limited predictability. 
> 
> They can be described as a stochastic process, in combination with 
> the physics governing their generation, growth, propagation, and decay – 
> as well as governing the interdependence between flow quantities such as 
> the water surface movements, flow velocities, and water pressure. 
> 
> The key statistics of wind waves (both seas and swells) in evolving sea states 
> can be predicted with wind wave models.
>
> Although waves are usually considered in the water seas of Earth, 
> the hydrocarbon seas of Titan may also have wind-driven waves. 
> 
> Waves in bodies of water may also be generated by other causes, 
> both at the surface and underwater (such as watercraft, animals, waterfalls, landslides, earthquakes, bubbles, and impact events).
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind%20wave) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave](/_Standards/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave.public](/_public/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave.internal](/_internal/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave.protect](/_protect/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave.private](/_private/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave.personal](/_personal/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Wind_Wave.secret](/_secret/Science/Physics/Wave/Surface_Wave/Wind_Wave.secret.md)

