---
title: leptosporangiate ferns
aliases:
  - Leptosporangiate
  - leptosporangiate fern
  - Polypodiidae
  - Leptosporangiatae
  - Filicidae
  - Filicales
---

# [[Leptosporangiate_Ferns]] 


![The royal fern *Osmunda regalis* in Julia Child\'s yard in Massachusetts, USA](Leptosporangiate_Ferns/Osmunda_regalis.gif)  ![*Azolla* sp., a floating aquatic fern](Leptosporangiate_Ferns/azolla_fern.gif)  ![*Blechnum buchtienii* growing in Costa Rica](Leptosporangiate_Ferns/Blechnum_buchtienii.gif)  ![Polypodium glycyrrhiza](Leptosporangiate_Ferns/Polypodium_glycyrrhiza.gif) 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> The Polypodiidae, commonly called **leptosporangiate fern**s, formerly Leptosporangiatae, 
> are one of four subclasses of ferns, the largest of these being the largest group of living ferns, 
> including some 11,000 species worldwide. 
> 
> The group has also been treated as the class Pteridopsida or Polypodiopsida, 
> although other classifications assign them a different rank. 
> Older names for the group include Filicidae and Filicales, 
> although at least the "water ferns" (now the Salviniales) were then treated separately.
>
> The leptosporangiate ferns are one of the four major groups of ferns, 
> with the other three being the eusporangiate ferns comprising 
> - the marattioid ferns (Marattiidae, Marattiaceae), 
> - the horsetails (Equisetiidae, Equisetaceae), and 
> - whisk ferns and moonworts. 
> 
> There are approximately 8465 species of living leptosporangiate ferns, 
> compared with about 2070 for all other ferns, totalling 10535 species of ferns. 
> Almost a third of leptosporangiate fern species are epiphytes.
>
> These ferns are called leptosporangiate because their sporangia arise from a single epidermal cell 
> and not from a group of cells as in eusporangiate ferns (a polyphyletic lineage). 
> 
> The mature sporangia have a wall that is just a single cell thick, 
> and are typically covered with a scale called the indusium, which can cover the whole sorus, 
> forming a ring or cup around the sorus, or can also be strongly reduced to completely absent. 
> 
> Many leptosporangiate ferns have an annulus around the sporangium, which ejects the spores.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leptosporangiate%20fern) 

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Fern](../Fern.md)
    -   [Land_Plant](../../Land_Plant.md)
    -   [Green plants](../../../Plants.md)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Filicopsida
    -   leptosporangiate ferns

-   » Sub-Groups 

## Introduction

[Kathleen M. Pryer and Alan R. Smith]()

Next to the flowering plants, the leptosporangiate ferns are the most
diverse group of living land plants. Recent estimates place their
diversity at about 12,000 species in 300 genera. The earliest known
occurrence of leptosporangiate ferns is in the Lower Carboniferous. The
five or more fern families recognized from this time were extinct by the
Permian. Subsequent major filicalean evolutionary radiations during the
Early Mesozoic yielded several families with extant representatives, but
it was not until the Upper Cretaceous, after flowering plants had become
dominant over much of the land surface, that much of extant fern
diversity seems to have appeared.

### Characteristics

(Extracted in large part from Wagner and Smith 1993)

**Life Cycle**

The fern life cycle is characterized by having two separate free-living
plants, gametophytes and sporophytes, interconnected by stages of the
sexual process. This phenomenon is referred to as an alternation of
phases of a single generation. Ordinarily, the more conspicuous and
dominant plant is the sporophyte (diploid and 2n), which is usually
perennial and lives for an indefinite period. The gametophytes (haploid
and n) tend to be inconspicuous and short-lived.

**Organs - Roots, Stems, and Leaves**

Roots of ferns tend to arise along the stem, commonly near leaf bases.
They have been poorly surveyed, and our knowledge of them is limited,
though recent work by Schneider (1996) has done much to improve this.

The stems of pteridophytes are mainly true rhizomes, i.e., stems that
run horizontally at or just beneath the surface of the ground. Some
ferns have upright stems like tiny tree trunks and are unable to form
colonies except for occasional upright branchings. Rarely, a
pteridophyte may have both upright stems and horizontal rhizomes. The
rhizomatous habit of many ferns results in extensive vegetative
reproduction. Anatomically the stems of pteridophytes are simpler than
in most seed plants because they are made up only of primary tissues.

Fern leaves are often referred to as fronds. These develop in a
distinctive manner with the soft growing tip (meristem) rolled up in the
center of the crozier (fiddlehead). The crozier is produced by a process
of growth and unfolding, and the characteristic pattern thus formed is
known as circinate vernation. Leaf development that is initiated at the
tip is called acropetal, and this development is characteristic of most
modern ferns. Leaves of seed plants, in contrast, tend to develop by
overall growth and expansion, i.e., by intercalary differentiation and
enlargement.

The parts of a leaf include the petiole (stipe) and the blade (lamina).
Petioles of ferns are diverse and offer many taxonomically valuable
characteristics. The patterns are characteristic of genera and sometimes
families. The main axis of the blade is called the midrib (rachis). If
the blade of a fern is divided into leaflets, these are called pinnae,
and if the leaflets are divided again into subleaflets, the subdivisions
are called pinnules. If a blade has no subdivision it is termed simple;
if it is once-divided only, it is regarded as 1-pinnate. If the pinnae
are divided further into pinnules, the blade is 2-pinnate. A very finely
divided blade may be 3 (or more)-pinnate (decompound).

**Indument - Hairs, Scales, and Glands**

In ferns, outgrowths of the epidermis of stems and leaves are common and
varied, and these features are very important in description and
identification. Simple outgrowths made up of a single cell or a chain of
several cells are generally called hairs or trichomes. Trichomes that
have two or three parallel rows of cells at the base and a single file
of cells at the tip are called bristles (setae). More elaborate
outgrowths that form flat plates of 3-20 or more rows of cells are
scales (paleae). Scales may be attached basally or centrally on a small
stalk. One of the more distinctive features of many hairs and scales is
the presence of enlarged and rounded terminal secretory cells. Glandular
hairs, sometimes called glands, may characterize particular species.
Such glands are not to be confused with nectaries, which are also
secretory structures. Nectaries are rare in ferns and have been found in
bracken fern and certain polypodies. Gametophytes of most ferns tend to
have distinctive brownish or colorless hairs (rhizoids) that apparently
serve to collect water and to anchor the plant.

**Veins - Free, Dichotomous, or Reticulate**

Many ferns have pinnately arranged free veins, with the major veins
running out from the rachis laterally and the minor veins repeating the
pattern. In leaves in which the veins come together to form a network of
loops or meshes (veins anastomosing; venation reticulate), the area
within a loop is an areole. Rarely, the venation of a pinna or pinnule
may be entirely dichotomous with the veinlets repeatedly forked from the
base to the tip of the segments. One of the special features of truly
dichotomous venation is that there is no midrib. The small, juvenile
leaves of many ferns have dichotomous venation, but distinct midribs are
generally found in more adult, larger leaves.

![ ](Leptosporangiate_Ferns/dryoparguta.gif){height="200" width="293"}\
Sporangia grouped together in roundish sori and covered by protective
kidney-shaped indusium

**Sporangia**

The spore-producing organ of ferns is the sporangium. With few
exceptions, sporangia are borne on leaves or modified leaves. When the
leaves that bear sporangia are like those that are only photosynthetic,
the leaves are called monomorphic. If, however, the sporangia are borne
on leaves or leaflets that are strongly modified and different from the
photosynthetic leaves, the leaves are said to be dimorphic. Sporangia of
all \"fern allies\" and eupsorangiate ferns are basically like those of
the pollen-producing microsporangia of gymnosperms or the anthers of
angiosperms in having thick walls with a number of cell layers. The
sporangia open usually by a transverse split and produce hundreds or
thousands of spores. Most ferns, however, have drastically modified and
reduced sporangia that are so simple, they appear to be little more than
elaborate trichomes bearing a tiny round spore case at the top. This
distinctive type is called the leptosporangium. The spore case itself is
few celled, and the outer wall is only one cell thick at maturity. The
number of spores produced in leptosporangia is usually only 128, 64, or
32, most commonly 64. Most leptosporangia have a bow or annulus made up
of strongly modified, thickened cells. The position and extent of the
annulus are important characteristics that define a number of fern
families. In ferns, sporangia are on leaves or leaf parts, in various
arrangements, solitary to many, often in clusters (sori) that are
linear, oval, or round. Sori are often protected by flaps formed by the
leaf margin (false indusia) or specialized scales or cuplike coverings
(true indusia) that are separately produced from the area on which the
sorus is borne (receptacle).

**Spores**

Spores of most modern ferns are all of one type, and the taxa are said
to be homosporous. Individual spores are mostly 20\--60 micrometers in
length or diameter. Spores may be tetrahedral or nearly globose, and the
scar (laesura) on the inner (proximal) surface may be triradiate; or the
spores may be more or less reniform or bean-shaped and bilateral, with a
single straight laesura. The type with the triradiate laesura is called
trilete, and the one with the linear laesura, monolete. Some ferns have
evolved the condition known as heterospory, in which two types of spores
are produced by a given species: small spores mostly 20\--30 micrometers
long (called male) and large spores 200\--700 micrometers in diameter
(called female).

![ ](Leptosporangiate_Ferns/ferngameto.gif){height="200" width="295"}\
Fern gametophyte with young developing sporophyte in notch

**Gametophytes**

Sexual fusion in ferns occurs on inconspicuous, free-living plants known
as gametophytes. Most gametophytes are green and surficial (surface
borne), but some are nongreen and subterranean. Both surficial and
subterranean gametophytes depend on free water through which the sperm
must swim to reach the egg and achieve fertilization. The male gametes
(sperms) are provided with special organelles equipped with cilia that
propel the gametes by their motion. Sperms are produced in specialized
cases (antheridia) that are either sunken in the gametophyte or protrude
from it. The antheridia release the sperms through a pore. Release
depends on maturity of the sperms and the presence of water. The female
gamete (egg) is located in a bottlelike organ, the archegonium. Sperms
swim to the opening at the top of the neck of the archegonium. The neck
provides a passageway to the enlarged base (venter), where the egg is
located and where fertilization takes place. It is believed that most
fern gametophytes pass sequentially through all-archegonial or
all-antheridial stages before becoming bisexual. Female gametophytes
release soluble substances (antheridiogens) that stimulate nearby
gametophytes to develop antheridia only. This tends to promote
cross-fertilization between gametophytes of the same or closely related
taxa.

**Chromosomes**

Spore mother cells, located inside the developing sporangia, are often
used to study the chromosomes of ferns. Homosporous ferns have high
chromosome base numbers (i.e., the lowest haploid multiple) ranging from
about x=20 to x=110. These are among the highest base numbers known in
vascular plants. Heterosporous ferns have low chromosome base numbers
like those of most seed plants, i.e., x=7-11. This generalization
applies across all divisions of pteridophytes. Polyploidy may be
superimposed on the base numbers and, at least among homosporous taxa,
very high numbers are sometimes attained. By observing meiotic
chromosomes, one can usually determine whether a given plant is a hybrid
or not. Meiosis in hybrids is generally very irregular, and the spores
that result are malformed.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Recent progress has been made in arriving at an approximate hypothesis
for pteridophyte relationships that is based on a rigorousand explicit
approach. A major synthetic book on early land plant evolution, which
includes a large number of new phylogenetic analyses that incorporate
both living and fossil plants has recently been completed (Kenrick and
Crane 1997a, 1997b). In addition, a major collaborative effort by
thirteen researchers (Hasebe et al. 1995) brought together rbcL data for
99 genera of leptosporangiate ferns representing 31 of the 33 extant
families. This large analysis provides an initial framework for
elaborating future studies using both molecular and nonmolecular
characters. Pryer et al. (1995) presented the first cladistic analysis
of extant ferns (sampled from all major groups) based on morphological
characters and compared results with an independent analysis of rbcL
data for the same set of fern taxa. These morphological analyses
confirmed that several results of the rbcL analyses that contradicted
long-standing pteridological dogma were neither \"aberrant\" nor
demonstrations of the worthlessness of morphology, but were actually
rather well supported by morphology as well. These results include the
monophyly of the heterosporous ferns (also simultaneously confirmed by
paleobotanical discoveries; Rothwell and Stockey, 1994) and the status
of the \"Polypodiaceae\" sensu lato as a strongly supported monophyletic
group, rather than as several unrelated lines derived from
Gleicheniaceae or Schizaeaceae.

From these recent studies bearing on fern relationships, it is clear
that new insight has not been the result of the use of any one type of
evidence. In fact, progress in fern phylogeny stems from a synthetic
approach that seeks to \"make sense\" of all of the data, including
information on fossil and extant organisms, morphology, and molecules.
Although a workable framework of higher-level fern phylogeny is now in
place, replacing former intuitive estimates of relationships founded
largely on concepts of overall similarity (see Smith 1995), our current
best estimate of higher-level fern phylogeny, based on morphology and
rbcL, demonstrates that only a few internal nodes, leptosporangiate
ferns (89%) and \"polypodiaceous\" ferns (86%), have robust bootstrap
support. In particular, internal nodes at the base of the fern topology
are very weakly supported, making it impossible to say with certainty
how any of these basal groups of ferns are related to one another.

**Relationships Among The Most Derived Ferns: \"The Polypodiaceaeous
Ferns\"**

                              ||| Polypodiaceae
                           ,==|
                        ,==|  `== Grammitidaceae
                  ,=====|  |
                  |     |  `===== Davalliaceae
                  |     |
                  |     `======== Nephrolepidaceae
            ,=====|
            |     ||||||||||||||| Dryopteridaceae
            |     |
         ,==|     |============== Blechnaceae
    A<===|  |     |
         |  |     |============== Thelypteridaceae
         |  |     |
         |  |     `============== Aspleniaceae
         |  |
         |  |     ,============== Vittariaceae
         |  |=====|
         |  |     ||||||||||||||| Pteridaceae
         |  |
         |  ||||||||||||||||||||| Dennstaedtiaceae
         |
         `======================= Lindsaeaceae

This large clade has strong bootstrap support (86%) in Pryer et al.
1995. All other leptopsorangiate ferns included in that study were
consistently and strongly excluded from this clade. The Polypodiaceae
and Grammitidaceae are strongly supported as sister taxa. This runs
counter to a previous hypothesis of a close relationship of polypodioids
and grammitidoids with the gleichenioid (Gleicheniaceae) ferns, which
was based primarily on these taxa sharing the exindusiate condition (a
character hypothesized in Pryer et al. 1995 to have arisen several
times). Likewise, Thelypteridaceae is more closely related to other
members of this large, well-supported clade, and not to the cyatheoids
(Cyatheaceae) as was suggested by others.

Despite being quite heterogeneous, the pteridoid ferns (Pteridaceae +
Vittariaceae) also form a group with robust support within this larger
clade. Although it is ambiguous whether this broadly circumscribed
pteridoid clade is more closely related to the \"Aspleniaceae to
Polypodiaceae\" clade, or to the dennstaedtioid (Dennstaedtiaceae)
ferns, it is certain that, contrary to previous hypotheses, they are
only very distantly related to the schizaeoid ferns.

Another heterogeneous group of taxa that is commonly referred to as the
dennstaedtioid ferns, is clearly not a monophyletic group. Various
groups of dennstaedtioid taxa form well supported clades, however, the
relationship of these clades are unresolved within the larger clade to
which they are robustly assigned.

**Relationships Among Basal Leptosporangiate Ferns**

                        ,====>A
                        |
                        |
                        |
                  ,=====|
                  |     |
                  |     |        ,==================== Cyatheaceae
            ,=====|     |        |
            |     |     |        |==================== Dicksoniaceae
         ,==|     |     |        |
    =====|  |     |     |     ,==|==================== Loxomataceae
         |  |     |     |=====|  |
         |  |     |     |     |  |==================== Lophosoriaceae
         |  |     |     |     |  |
         |  |     |     |     |  `==================== Metaxyaceae
         |  |     |     |     |
         |  |     |     |     `======================= Plagiogyriaceae
         |  |     |     |
         |  |     |     |           ,================= Azollaceae
         |  |     |     |        ,==|
         |  |     |     |     ,==|  `================= Salviniaceae
         |  |     |     |=====|  |
         |  |     |     |     |  `==================== Hydropteris
         |  |     |     |     |
         |  |     |     |     `======================= Marsileaceae
         |  |     |     |
         |  |     |     `============================= Schizaeaceae
         |  |     |
         |  |     |     ,============================= Cheiropleuriaceae
         |  |     |=====|
         |  |     |     `============================= Dipteridaceae
         |  |     |
         |  |     `=================================== Matoniaceae
         |  |
         |  |========================================= Gleicheniaceae
         |  |
         |  `========================================= Hymenophyllaceae
         |
         `============================================ Osmundaceae

In Fig. 4 of Pryer et al. 1995, there is good support for Osmundaceae
being the most basal leptosporangiate fern family. This is concordant
with the fossil record for Osmundaceae which extends into the late
Permian, one of the oldest known extant leptosporangiate fern families
(Stewart and Rothwell, 1993). The strong bootstrap support for the
leptosporangiate clade (including Osmundaceae) indicates that despite
its few eusporangiate-like features, Osmundaceae is more closely related
to leptosporangiate ferns than it is to any other group.

The monophyly of the heterosporous ferns (Azollaceae, Salviniaceae, and
Marsileaceae) is the most strongly supported result from all analyses in
Pryer et al. 1995. In some early classifications, Salviniaceae,
Azollaceae, and Marsileaceae were maintained as separate orders within
the leptosporangiate ferns. In other classifications, the families were
segregated as the order Hydropteridales, to emphasize the fact that they
are aquatic and heterosporous. Subsequent authors attributed these
characters not to shared common ancestry, but to convergence. Therefore,
more recently, the three groups have been maintained as separate orders,
Marsileales and Salviniales, to emphasize their structural differences.
It has been hypothesized that the Marsileales are more closely related
to the Schizaeaceae and the Salviniales to the Hymenophyllaceae than
either is to each other. Rothwell and Stockey (1994) reported fossil
evidence for a new heterosporous fern genus, Hydropteris. Their
cladistic analysis of heterosporous ferns demonstrated that they are a
monophyletic group, which led these authors to readopt the order
Hydropteridales. Hasebe et al. (1994, 1995) demonstrated the monophyly
of the heterosporous ferns based on rbcL sequences. The results of Pryer
et al. 1995 strongly corroborate a single origin of heterospory in
leptosporangiate ferns.

The tree ferns (Cyatheaceae, Dicksoniaceae, Metaxyaceae), together with
Plagiogyriaceae, come together in a robustly supported clade in Pryer et
al. 1995. Plagiogyriaceae has been placed previously with Osmundaceae.

Although the tree ferns, the heterosporous ferns, and the schizaeoid
ferns are each well supported clades, their interrelationships (and
those of all basal families) remain unresolved.





## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.md) 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.public.md) 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.internal.md) 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.protect.md) 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.private.md) 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.personal.md) 

### [Leptosporangiate_Ferns.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Plants/Land_Plant/Fern/Leptosporangiate_Ferns.secret.md)

