---
aliases:
  - Radio waves
  - Hertzian waves
has_id_wikidata: Q4262
part_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~electromagnetic_spectrum,133139]]"
topic_s_main_category: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Q8020789,8020789]]"
subclass_of:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~electromagnetic_radiation,12969754]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~electromagnetic_wave,11386]]"
permanent_duplicated_item: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Q16109693,16109693]]"
follows: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~infrared_radiation,11388]]"
U_S_National_Archives_Identifier: "10675684"
Commons_category: Radio waves
IEV_number: 701-02-12
MeSH_tree_code:
  - G01.358.500.505.810
  - G01.750.250.810
  - G01.750.770.721
---

# [[Radio_Wave]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[WD~Radio_wave,4262]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> Radio waves (formerly called Hertzian waves) are a type of electromagnetic radiation 
> with the lowest frequencies and the longest wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum, 
> typically with frequencies below 300 gigahertz (GHz) and wavelengths greater than 1 millimeter (3â„64 inch), 
> about the diameter of a grain of rice.  
> 
> Radio waves with frequencies above about 1 GHz and wavelengths shorter than 30 centimeters are called microwaves.  
> 
> Like all electromagnetic waves, radio waves in vacuum travel at the speed of light, 
> and in the Earth's atmosphere at a slightly lower speed. 
> 
> Radio waves are generated by charged particles undergoing acceleration, 
> such as time-varying electric currents. 
> 
> Naturally occurring radio waves are emitted by lightning and astronomical objects, 
> and are part of the blackbody radiation emitted by all warm objects.
>
> Radio waves are generated artificially by an electronic device called a transmitter, 
> which is connected to an antenna, which radiates the waves. 
> 
> They are received by another antenna connected to a radio receiver, which processes the received signal. 
> 
> Radio waves are very commonly used in modern technology for 
> fixed and mobile radio communication, broadcasting, radar and radio navigation systems, 
> communications satellites, wireless computer networks, and many other applications. 
> 
> Different frequencies of radio waves have different propagation characteristics in the Earth's atmosphere; 
> - long waves can diffract around obstacles like mountains and follow the contour of the Earth (ground waves), 
> - shorter waves can reflect off the ionosphere and return to Earth beyond the horizon (skywaves), 
> - while much shorter wavelengths bend or diffract very little and travel on a line of sight, 
>   so their propagation distances are limited to the visual horizon.
>
> To prevent interference between different users, 
> the artificial generation and use of radio waves is strictly regulated by law, 
> coordinated by an international body called the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 
> which defines radio waves as "electromagnetic waves of frequencies arbitrarily lower than 3000 GHz, 
> propagated in space without artificial guide". 
> 
> The radio spectrum is divided into a number of radio bands on the basis of frequency, 
> allocated to different uses. 
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio%20wave) 

