---
aliases:
  - Earth's magnetic field
  - Das magnetische Feld der Erde
has_id_wikidata: Q6500960
studied_by: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~geomagnetism,114591]]"
described_by_source:
  - "[[../WikiData/WD~Brockhaus_and_Efron_Encyclopedic_Dictionary,602358]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Encyclopædia_Britannica_11th_edition,867541]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Small_Brockhaus_and_Efron_Encyclopedic_Dictionary,19180675]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Armenian_Soviet_Encyclopedia,_vol._3,124737616]]"
subclass_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~magnetism,3294789]]"
instance_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~planetary_magnetic_field,4274059]]"
part_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Earth,2]]"
OmegaWiki_Defined_Meaning: "1459763"
Dewey_Decimal_Classification: "538.7"
Commons_gallery: Earth's magnetic field
Commons_category: Earth's magnetic field
pronunciation_audio: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/LL-Q58635%20%28pan%29-Gaurav%20Jhammat-%E0%A8%A7%E0%A8%B0%E0%A8%A4%E0%A9%80%20%E0%A8%A6%E0%A8%BE%20%E0%A8%9A%E0%A9%81%E0%A9%B0%E0%A8%AC%E0%A8%95%E0%A9%80%20%E0%A8%96%E0%A9%87%E0%A8%A4%E0%A8%B0.wav
image: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/Total%20Magnetic%20Field%20for%202000.jpg
Krugosvet_article: nauka_i_tehnika/fizika/MAGNITNOE_POLE_ZEMLI.html
---


# [[Earth's_magnetic_field]]

#is_/same_as :: [[../WikiData/WD~Earth's_magnetic_field,6500960|WD~Earth's_magnetic_field,6500960]]

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> **Earth's magnetic field**, also known as the geomagnetic field, is the magnetic field that extends from Earth's interior out into space, where it interacts with the solar wind, a stream of       charged particles emanating from the Sun. The magnetic field is generated by electric currents due to the motion of convection currents of a mixture of molten iron and nickel in Earth's outer core: these convection currents are caused by heat escaping from the core, a natural process called a geodynamo.
>
> The magnitude of Earth's magnetic field  at its surface ranges from 25 to 65 μT (0.25 to 0.65 G). As an approximation, it is represented by a field of a magnetic dipole currently tilted at an angle of about 11° with respect to Earth's rotational axis, as if there were an enormous bar magnet placed at that angle through the center of Earth. The North geomagnetic pole (Ellesmere Island, Nunavut, Canada) actually represents the South pole of Earth's magnetic field, and conversely the South geomagnetic pole corresponds to the north pole of Earth's magnetic field (because opposite magnetic poles attract and the north end of a magnet, like a compass needle, points toward Earth's South magnetic field.)
>
> While the North and South magnetic poles are usually located near the geographic poles, they slowly and continuously move over geological time scales, but sufficiently slowly for ordinary compasses to remain useful for navigation. However, at irregular intervals averaging several hundred thousand years, Earth's field reverses and the North and South Magnetic Poles abruptly switch places. These reversals of the geomagnetic poles leave a record in rocks that are of value to paleomagnetists in calculating geomagnetic fields in the past. Such information in turn is helpful in studying the motions of continents and ocean floors. The magnetosphere is defined by the extent of Earth's magnetic field in space or geospace. It extends above the ionosphere, several tens of thousands of kilometres into space, protecting Earth from the charged particles of the solar wind and cosmic rays that would otherwise strip away the upper atmosphere, including the ozone layer that protects Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth's%20magnetic%20field)


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field](/_Standards/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field.public](/_public/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field.internal](/_internal/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field.protect](/_protect/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field.private](/_private/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field.personal](/_personal/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Earth_magnetic_Field.secret](/_secret/Earth/Earth_magnetic_Field.secret.md)

