---
aliases:
- C64
- Commodore 64
- Комодор 64
- קומודור 64
- كومودور 64
- کمودور ۶۴
- കൊമോഡോർ 64
- コモドール64
- 康懋达64
- 康懋達64
- 科漫多六四
- 코모도어 64
has_id_wikidata: Q99775
dv_has_:
  name_:
    af: Commodore 64
    an: Commodore 64
    ar: كومودور 64
    arz: كومودور 64
    be_tarask: Commodore 64
    bg: Commodore 64
    ca: Commodore 64
    cs: Commodore 64
    da: Commodore 64
    de: Commodore 64
    de_ch: Commodore 64
    el: Commodore 64
    en: Commodore 64
    en_ca: Commodore 64
    en_gb: Commodore 64
    eo: Commodore 64
    es: Commodore 64
    et: Commodore 64
    eu: Commodore 64
    fa: کمودور ۶۴
    fi: Commodore 64
    fr: Commodore 64
    gl: Commodore 64
    gsw: Commodore 64
    he: קומודור 64
    hr: Commodore 64
    hu: Commodore 64
    hy: Commodore 64
    ia: Commodore 64
    id: Commodore 64
    it: Commodore 64
    ja: コモドール64
    jv: Commodore 64
    ko: 코모도어 64
    lld: Commodore 64
    lmo: Commodore 64
    lzh: 科漫多六四
    ml: കൊമോഡോർ 64
    mul: Commodore 64
    nb: Commodore 64
    nds: Commodore 64
    nl: Commodore 64
    nn: Commodore 64
    oc: Commodore 64
    pl: Commodore 64
    pt: Commodore 64
    pt_br: Commodore 64
    rmf: Commodore 64
    ro: Commodore 64
    ru: Commodore 64
    scn: Commodore 64
    sco: Commodore 64
    se: Commodore 64
    sh: Commodore 64
    sju: Commodore 64
    sk: Commodore 64
    sl: Commodore 64
    smn: Commodore 64
    sms: Commodore 64
    sr: Комодор 64
    sv: Commodore 64
    tr: Commodore 64
    uk: Commodore 64
    vec: Commodore 64
    vi: Commodore 64
    wuu: 康懋达64
    zh: 康懋達64
    zh_hk: 康懋達64
    zh_tw: 康懋達64
---

# [[C64]]  

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> The Commodore 64, also known as the **C64**, is an 8-bit home computer 
> introduced in January 1982 by Commodore International 
> (first shown at the Consumer Electronics Show, January 7–10, 1982, in Las Vegas). 
> 
> It has been listed in the Guinness World Records as 
> the highest-selling single computer model of all time, 
> with independent estimates placing the number sold between 12.5 and 17 million units. 
> 
> Volume production started in early 1982, 
> marketing in August for US$595 (equivalent to $1,940 in 2024). 
> Preceded by the VIC-20 and Commodore PET, the C64 took its name from its 64 kilobytes of RAM. 
> With support for multicolor sprites and a custom chip for waveform generation, 
> the C64 could create superior visuals and audio compared to systems without such custom hardware.
>
> The C64 dominated the low-end computer market (except in the UK, France and Japan, 
> lasting only about six months in Japan) for most of the later years of the 1980s. 
> For a substantial period (1983–1986), the C64 had between 30% and 40% share of the US market 
> and two million units sold per year, outselling IBM PC compatibles, the Apple II, 
> and Atari 8-bit computers. 
> 
> Sam Tramiel, a later Atari president and the son of Commodore's founder, said in a 1989 interview, 
> "When I was at Commodore we were building 400,000 C64s a month for a couple of years." 
> In the UK market, the C64 faced competition from the BBC Micro, the ZX Spectrum, 
> and later the Amstrad CPC 464, 
> but the C64 was still the second-most-popular computer in the UK after the ZX Spectrum. 
> The Commodore 64 failed to make any impact in Japan, 
> as their market was dominated by Japanese computers, 
> such as the NEC PC-8801, Sharp X1, Fujitsu FM-7 and MSX, 
> and in France, where the ZX Spectrum, Thomson MO5 and TO7, and Amstrad CPC 464 dominated the market.
>
> Part of the Commodore 64's success was its sale in regular retail stores 
> instead of only electronics or computer hobbyist specialty stores. 
> 
> Commodore produced many of its parts in-house to control costs, 
> including custom integrated circuit chips from MOS Technology. 
> 
> In the United States, it has been compared to the Ford Model T automobile for its role in 
> bringing a new technology to middle-class households via creative and affordable mass-production. 
> 
> Approximately 10,000 commercial software titles have been made for the Commodore 64, 
> including development tools, office productivity applications, and video games. 
> 
> C64 emulators allow anyone with a modern computer, 
> or a compatible video game console, to run these programs today. 
> 
> The C64 is also credited with popularizing the computer demoscene 
> and is still used today by some computer hobbyists. 
> In 2011, 17 years after it was taken off the market, research showed that 
> brand recognition for the model was still at 87%.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodore%2064) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_Standards/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64|C64]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_public/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64.public|C64.public]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_internal/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64.internal|C64.internal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_protect/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64.protect|C64.protect]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_private/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64.private|C64.private]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_personal/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64.personal|C64.personal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_secret/Technology/IT/Computer_Hardware/Computer/C64.secret|C64.secret]] 

