---
aliases:
- electrical muscle stimulation
- electroestimulació muscular
- Electroestimulación muscular
- Electromiostimulare
- električna mišična stimulacija
- Elettrostimolazione muscolare
- Kích thích cơ bằng điện
- Muskelstimulator
- Reizstrom
- stimulation musculaire électrique
- ηλεκτρική μυϊκή διέγερση
- електрична стимуляція м’язів
- электромиостимуляция
- גירוי שרירים חשמלי
- التحفيز الكهربائي للعضلات
- تحریک الکتریکی عضلات
- தசை தூண்டுதல் மின் சிகிச்சை
- 電気的筋肉刺激
- 전기근육자극요법
has_id_wikidata: Q653580
subclass_of: '[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~electrostimulation,50813117|WD~electrostimulation,50813117]]'
Commons_category: Electrical muscle stimulation
dv_has_:
  name_:
    ar: التحفيز الكهربائي للعضلات
    ca: electroestimulació muscular
    de: Reizstrom
    el: ηλεκτρική μυϊκή διέγερση
    en: electrical muscle stimulation
    es: Electroestimulación muscular
    fa: تحریک الکتریکی عضلات
    fr: stimulation musculaire électrique
    he: גירוי שרירים חשמלי
    it: Elettrostimolazione muscolare
    ja: 電気的筋肉刺激
    ko: 전기근육자극요법
    nb: Muskelstimulator
    nl: electrical muscle stimulation
    ro: Electromiostimulare
    ru: электромиостимуляция
    sl: električna mišična stimulacija
    ta: தசை தூண்டுதல் மின் சிகிச்சை
    uk: електрична стимуляція м’язів
    vi: Kích thích cơ bằng điện
---

# [[EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation)]]  

## [[EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation)]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[_Standards/WikiData/WD~Electrical_muscle_stimulation,653580|WD~Electrical_muscle_stimulation,653580]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> Electrical muscle stimulation (EMS), also known as neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) or electromyostimulation, 
> is the elicitation of muscle contraction using electrical impulses. 
> 
> EMS has received attention for various reasons: it can be utilized as a strength training tool for healthy subjects and athletes; 
> it could be used as a rehabilitation and preventive tool for people who are partially or totally immobilized; 
> it could be utilized as a testing tool for evaluating the neural and/or muscular function in vivo. 
> 
> EMS has been proven to be **more beneficial before exercise** and activity due to early muscle activation. 
> Electrostimulation has been found to be **ineffective during post exercise recovery** 
> and can even lead to an increase in delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS).   
>
> The impulses are generated by the device and are delivered through electrodes on the skin near to the muscles being stimulated. 
> The electrodes are generally pads that adhere to the skin. 
> The impulses mimic the action potential that comes from the central nervous system, causing the muscles to contract. 
> 
> The use of EMS has been cited by sports scientists as a complementary technique for sports training, 
> and published research is available on the results obtained. 
> In the United States, EMS devices are regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
>
> A number of reviews have looked at the devices.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical%20muscle%20stimulation) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_Standards/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation)|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation)]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_public/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).public|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).public]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_internal/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).internal|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).internal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_protect/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).protect|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).protect]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_private/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).private|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).private]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_personal/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).personal|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).personal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_secret/bio/Medicine/Health/Physical_Fitness/Physical_Exercise/Sport/EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).secret|EMS(Electrical_muscle_stimulation).secret]] 

