---
title: Saxifragales
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [Eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Core Eudicots
    -   [Santalales](Santalales.md)
    -   Saxifragales
    -   [Berberidopsidales](Berberidopsidales.md)
    -   [Rosids](Rosids.md)
    -   [Caryophyllales](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots/Caryophyllales.md)
    -   [Asterids](Asterids.md)

-   »

# Saxifragales 

[Doug Soltis, Pam Soltis, and Monica Arakaki](#AboutThisPage)

![Fothergilla major](Fothergilla_major00683.jpg)
![](Sempervivum_montanum3001.jpg)
![](Saxifraga_cochlearis01365.txt)

Relationships after Fishbein *et al*. (2001), Hilu *et al.* (2003), and
Fishbein and Soltis (2004).

Containing group: [Core Eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots/Eudicots.md)

### Introduction

Saxifragales are a morphologically diverse group, including annual and
perennial herbs, succulents, aquatics, shrubs, vines, and large trees.
Saxifragales include the well-known families Saxifragaceae,
Crassulaceae, Cercidiphyllaceae, Grossulariaceae, Paeoniaceaea, and
Hamamelidaceae. Other members include Altingiaceae, Daphniphyllaceae,
Haloragaceae, Iteaceae, and Pterostemonaceae. Prior to molecular
phylogenetics (Morgan and Soltis, 1993; Fishbein *et al.*, 2001),
members of this clade were classified based on morphology, in three
subclasses from the six recognized in recent classifications (Cronquist,
1981; Takhtajan, 1997, reviewed in Morgan and Soltis, 1993; Qiu *et
al*., 1998; Soltis *et al*., 2005).

Analysis of *rbcL* sequences first revealed the Saxifragales clade
(Chase *et al*., 1993; Morgan and Soltis, 1993). Investigation of *atpB*
alone, as well as *atpB* + *rbcL,* also indicated a monophyletic
Saxifragales, but none of these studies provided support
[\>] 50% (Chase and Albert, 1998; Savolainen *et al.*,
2000). 18S rDNA alone and 18S rDNA + *rbcL* revealed a Saxifragales
clade with moderate jackknife support (e.g., D. Soltis *et al*., 1997,
1998; D. Soltis and Soltis, 1997). Most recently, in analyses of three
or four-gene data sets (*rbcL*, 18S rDNA,
*atp[B]{style="font-family: Symbol;"}*) (Hoot *et al*., 1999; D. P.
Soltis *et al*. 1999, D. Soltis *et al*., 2000), the monophyly of
Saxifragales received strong support.\

### Characteristics

Saxifragales include trees, shrubs, lianas, annual and perennial herbs,
succulents, and aquatics. Flowers vary considerably in arrangement,
merosity, and degree of fusion of perianth parts, stamen and carpel
number, ovary position, and degree of syncarpy (Cronquist 1981;
Takhtajan 1997). Due to the great morphological diversity found in this
clade, synapomorphies for the group are not clear.

Possible synapomorphies include a partially fused bicarpellate
gynoecium, a hypanthium, and glandular leaf teeth (Judd *et al.*, 2002).
Aspects of leaf venation and wood anatomy are similar in the woody
members of the clade: solitary vessels, scalariform perforations,
opposite to scalariform intervessel pits, nonseptate fibers with
distinctly bordered pits, and apotracheal parenchyma (Baas *et al.*,
2000). Exceptions to this suite of features occur, however, in
Crassulaceae and Saxifragaceae, but in these primarily herbaceous
families, woodiness probably arose secondarily (Carlquist, 1988; Mort
*et al.,* 2001). A seed character represents a possible synapomorphy for
the core members of the Saxifragales clade. An exotestal palisade with
thickened outer walls (Nandi *et al.*, 1998) is found in Saxifragaceae,
*Ribes* (Grossulariaceae), Crassulaceae, and Paeoniaceae. However,
Hamamelidaceae are characterized by mesotestal seeds (see Corner, 1976
for a review of angiosperm seeds).

### Relationships to other clades of Eudicots

Whereas the composition of Saxifragales is now clear, the position of
the clade among the core eudicots remains uncertain. Initial analyses of
*rbcL* sequences (Chase *et al*., 1993) placed the order as sister to
all rosids, while analyses of *atpB* sequences placed Saxifragales as
sister to a large clade of most core eudicots (Savolainen *et al.*,
2000a). None of these placements received support \> 50%. The three-gene
analysis (P. Soltis *et al*., 1999; D. Soltis *et al*., 2000) placed
Saxifragales as sister to rosids, but with only weak jackknife support
(60%). However, in spite of the weak support (e.g., D. Soltis *et al*.,
2000), the simple, pentamerous flowers have long been thought to
indicate a relationship with Rosaceae and other rosids, but whether
these floral features are synapomorphies for Saxifragales + rosids or
symplesiomorphies (i.e., shared ancestral features) is unclear.
Additional research is needed to resolve the relationship of
Saxifragales within the core eudicots.

The analyses of a four-gene data set for eudicots revealed a placement
of Saxifragales as sister to all other core eudicots except Gunnerales
and Berberidopsidales (D. Soltis *et al*., 2003), but without support \>
50%. Analysis of *matK* placed Gunnerales sister to other core eudicots,
followed by a trichotomy of Saxifragales, rosids, remaining core
eudicots (Santalales, asterids, Caryophyllales, Berberidopsidales) (Hilu
*et al*., submitted). Thus, it appears likely that Saxifragales occupies
a pivotal position near the base of the core eudicot radiation.
Molecular data also demonstrated that the initial diversification of
Saxifragales was rapid (Fishbein *et al.*, 2001). These data further
suggested that the early diversification of Saxifragales was
contemporaneous with the initial radiation of the major lineages of
eudicots and that of non-eudicot (magnoliid and monocot) angiosperms.
Molecular data suggesting an early diversification also agree with the
fossil record in that fossils attributed to Saxifragales are present in
Turonian-Campanian strata (89.5 mya), which is comparable in age to the
oldest fossils of core eudicots (Magallón *et al*., 1999; Soltis *et
al*., 2005).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Several members of Saxifragales were considered closely related in some
classifications. Saxifragaceae, Grossulariaceae, Iteaceae,
Pterostemonaceae, Penthoraceae, and Tetracarpaeaceae were previously
considered part of a much more broadly defined Saxifragaceae *sensu
lato* (Engler, 1928; reviewed in Morgan and Soltis, 1993). A close
relationship of these core families of Saxifragaceae *s. l*. to
Crassulaceae was also proposed (e.g., Cronquist, 1981; Takhtajan, 1987,
1997). Hamamelidaceae, Altingiaceae, Cercidiphyllaceae, and
Daphniphyllaceae were also considered closely related in modern
classifications (e.g., the "lower hamamelids" *sensu* Walker and Doyle,
1975). However, Saxifragales also include Haloragaceae and Paeoniaceae,
families that have never been placed with any members of Saxifragales in
previous classifications. Haloragaceae have been placed in or near the
rosid order Myrtales (Cronquist, 1981), whereas Paeoniaceae have been
considered closely related to Magnoliaceae (e.g. Worsdell 1908),
Ranunculaceae (e.g., Takhtajan 1997), or Dilleniaceae (e.g. Cronquist,
1981). The inclusion of *Aphanopetalum* (previously placed in the rosid
family Cunoniaceae) in Saxifragales initially seemed surprising, but was
suggested previously based on anatomical data (Dickison *et al*., 1994).

Phylogenetic analyses of a five gene-data set identified two
well-supported clades of families in Saxifragales (Fishbein *et al*.,
2001). Strong support was found for a Saxifragaceae alliance of
Saxifragaceae and several woody members of the former Saxifragaceae *s.
l.* (i.e., Grossulariaceae, Iteaceae, and Pterostemonaceae). Within this
clade *Ribes* (Grossulariaceae) was found to be the immediate sister to
Saxifragaceae, followed subsequently by a clade of Iteaceae ,
Pterostemonaceae. A second strongly supported clade within Saxifragales
consists of a well-supported Crassulaceae (see Mort *et al.*, 2001) as
sister to a clade of *Tetracarpaea* (Tetracarpaeaceae)*, Penthorum*
(Penthoraceae), Haloragaceae, and *Aphanopetalum* (Cunoniaceae).
*Tetracarpaea, Penthorum*, and *Aphanopetalum* are all small genera that
should be included within an expanded family Haloragaceae (APGII, 2003).
The Saxifragaceae alliance and Crassulaceae , Haloragaceae form a clade
in the strict consensus of shortest trees, but this clade does not
receive support \> 50% in parsimony analyses. However, this sister group
relationship is weakly supported (68% bootstrap) in maximum likelihood
analyses (Fishbein *et al.*, 2001) and strongly supported using Bayesian
inference (1.00 posterior probability; Fishbein, unpubl.).

A considerable amount of sequence data (i. e. Fishbein *et al.*, 2001;
D. Soltis *et al.*, 2000; Hoot *et al.*, 1999) has been unable to
resolve some of the critical deep relationships among clades within
Saxifragales. A large core clade consisting of Saxifragaceae and
Crassulaceae , Haloragaceae is evident in all shortest trees, but does
not receive support greater than 50%. Furthermore, relationships among
this core group, and the remaining families (Paeoniaceae,
Cercidiphyllaceae, Daphniphyllaceae, Hamamelidaceae, and Altingiaceae)
also remain unclear (Feng *et al.*, 1998; Qiu *et al*., 1998; Hoot *et
al.*, 1999; Savolainen *et al*., 2000; Fishbein et al., 2001; D. Soltis
et al., 2000). In maximum likelihood analyses of a five-gene data set,
Fishbein *et al.* (2001) recovered an optimal topology with
Daphniphyllaceae and Hamamelidaceae sister to the remaining members of
the clade; however, the precise branching order of these two
early-diverging members of Saxifragales was unclear. Following
Daphniphyllaceae and Hamamelidaceae, Altingiaceae, Cercidiphyllaceae,
and Paeoniaceae appeared as successive sisters to a core clade of
Saxifragaceae and Haloragaceae , Crassulaceae. Fishbein *et al*. (2001)
also showed that the poor resolution obtained in Saxifragales is not due
to violations of assumptions or to combining data partitions having
conflicting histories or processes. Rather, their analyses suggest
instead that the initial diversification of Saxifragales was indeed
rapid.

### References

APG II (Angiosperm Phylogeny Group). 2003. An update of the Angiosperm
Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering
plants. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 141:399-436.

Baas, P., E. Wheeler, and M. Chase. 2000. Dicotyledonous wood anatomy
and the APG system of angiosperm classification. Botanical Journal of
the Linnean Society 134:3-17.

Carlquist, S. 1988. Comparative wood anatomy. Springer. Berlin.

Chase, M. W. and V. A. Albert. 1998. A perspective on the contribution
of plastid rbcL DNA sequences to angiosperm phylogenetics. In: D. E.
Soltis, P. S. Soltis, and J. J. Doyle \[eds.\], Molecular Systematics of
Plants II: DNA Sequencing, Kluwer, Boston.

Chase, M. W., D. E. Soltis, R. G. Olmstead, D. Morgan, H. D. Les, B. D.
Mishler, M. R. Duvall, R. A. Price, H. G. Hills, Y.-L. Qiu, K. A. Kron,
J. H. Rettig, E. Conti, J. D. Palmer, J. R. Manhart, K. J. Sytsma, H. J.
Michaels, W. J. Kress, K. G. Karol, W. D. Clark, M. Hedrén, B. S. Gaut,
R. K. Jansen, K.-J. Kim, C. F. Wimpee, J. F. Smith, G. R. Furnier, S. H.
Strauss, Q.-Y. Xiang, G. M. Plunkett, P. S. Soltis, S. M. Swensen, S. E.
Williams, P. A. Gadek, C. J. Quinn, L. E. Eguiarte, E. Golenberg, G. H.
Learn Jr., S. W. Graham, S. C. H. Barrett, S. Dayanandan, and V. A.
Albert. 1993. Phylogenetics of seed plants: an analysis of nucleotide
sequences from the plastid gene rbcL. Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 80:526-580.

Corner, E. J. H. 1976. The seed of Dycotyledons. Cambridge University
Press, New York.

Cronquist, A. 1981. An Integrated System of Classification of Flowering
Plants. Columbia University Press, New York.

Dickison, W. C., M. H. Hils, T. W. Lucansky, and W. L. Stern. 1994.
Comparative anatomy and systematics of woody Saxifragaceae Endl.
Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 114:167-182.

Engler, A. 1930. Saxifragaceae. In: A. Engler and K. Prantl \[eds.\],
Die Natürlichenn Pflanzenfamilien, 2nd ed. Engelmann, Leipzig.

Fishbein, M., C. Hibsch-Jetter, D. E. Soltis, and L. Hufford. 2001.
Phylogeny of Saxifragales (Angiosperms, Eudicots): Analysis of a rapid,
ancient radiation. Systematic Biology 50:817-847.

Hilu, K. W., T. Borsch, K. Müller, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, V.
Savolainen, M. W. Chase, M. P. Powell, L. A. Alice, R. Evans, H.
Sauquet, C. Neinhuis, T. A. B. Slotta, J. G. Rohwer, C. S. Campbell, and
L. W. Chatrou. 2003. Angiosperm phylogeny based on matK sequence
information. American Journal of Botany 90(12):1758-1776.

Hoot, S. B., S. Magallón, and P. R. Crane. 1999. Phylogeny of basal
eudicots based on three molecular data sets: atpB, rbcL, and 18S nuclear
ribosomal DNA sequences. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden
86:1-32.

Judd, W. S., C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, and M. J.
Donoghue. 2002. Plant Systematics: a Phylogenetic Approach. Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.

Magallón, S., P. R. Crane, and P. S. Herendeen. 1999. Phylogenetic
pattern, diversity and diversification of eudicots. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 86:297-372.

Morgan, D. R. and D. E. Soltis. 1993. Phylogenetic relationships among
Saxofragaceae sensu lato based on rbcL sequence data. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 80:631-660.

Mort, M. E., D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, J. Francisco-Ortega, and A.
Santos-Guerra. 2001. Phylogenetic relationships and evolution of
Crassulaceae inferred from matK sequence data. American Journal of
Botany 88:76-91.

Nandi, O. I., M. W. Chase, and P. K. Endress. 1998. A combined cladistic
analysis of angiosperms using rbcL and nonmolecular data sets. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 85:137-212.

Qiu, Y. L., M. W. Chase, S. B. Hoot, E. Conti, P. R. Crane, K. J.
Sytsma, and C. R. Parks. 1998. Phylogenetics of the Hamamelidae and
their allies: parsimony analyses of nucleotide sequences of the plastid
gene rbcL. International Journal of Plant Sciences 159:891-905.

Savolainen, V., M. W. Chase, S. B. Hoot, C. M. Morton, D. E. Soltis, C.
Bayer, M. F. Fay, A. Y. De Bruijn, S. Sullivan, and Y. L. Qiu. 2000a.
Phylogenetics of flowering plants based on combined analysis of plastid
atpB and rbcL gene sequences. Systematic Biology 49:306-362.

Savolainen, V., M. F. Fay, D. C. Albach, A. Backlund, M. van der Bank,
K. M. Cameron, S. A. Johnson, M. D. Lledó, J.-C. Pintaud, M. Powell, M.
C. Sheahan, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, P. Weston, W. M. Whitten, K. J.
Wurdack, and M. W. Chase. 2000b. Phylogeny of the eudicots: a nearly
complete familial analysis based on rbcl gene sequences. Kew Bulletin
55:257-309.

Soltis, D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. W. Chase, M. E. Mort, D. C. Albach, M.
Zanis, V. Savolainen, W. H. Hahn, S. B. Hoot, M. F. Fay, M. Axtell, S.
M. Swensen, L. M. Prince, W. J. Kress, K. C. Nixon, and J. S. Farris.
2000. Angiosperm phylogeny inferred from 18S rDNA, rbcL, and atpB
sequences. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 133:381-461.

Soltis, D. E., M. E. Mort, P. S. Soltis, C. Hibsch-Jetter, E. A. Zimmer,
and D. Morgan. 1999. Phylogenetic relationships of the enigmatic
angiosperm family Podostemaceae inferred from 18S rDNA and rbcL sequence
data. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 11:261-272.

Soltis D. E. and P. S. Soltis. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships in
Saxifragaceae sensu lato: a comparison of topologies based on 18S rDNA
and rbcL sequences. American Journal of Botany 84:504-522.

Soltis D. E., C. Hibsch-Jetter, P. S. Soltis, M. Chase, and J. S.
Farris. 1997. Molecular phylogenetic relationships among angiosperms: an
overview based on rbcL and 18S rDNA sequences. In: K. Iwatsuki and P. H.
Raven \[eds.\], Evolution and Diversification of Land Plants. Springer,
Tokyo.

Soltis D. E., P. S. Soltis, M. E. Mort, M. W. Chase, V. Savolainen, S.
B. Hoot, and C. M. Morton. 1998. Inferring complex phylogenies using
parsimony: an empirical approach using three large DNA data sets for
angiosperms. Systematic Biology 47:32-42.

Soltis D. E., A. E. Senters, M. Zanis, S. Kim, J. D. Thompson, P. S.
Soltis, L. P. Ronse de Craene, P. K. Endress, and J. S. Farris. 2003.
Gunnerales are sister to all other core eudicots: implications for the
evolution of pentamery. American Journal of Botany 90:461-471.

Soltis D. E., V. A. Albert, S. Kim, M.-J. Yoo, P. S. Soltis, M. W.
Frohlich, J. Leebens-Mack, H. Kong, K. Wall, C. dePamphilis, and H. Ma.
2005. Evolution of the flower. In: R. Henry \[ed.\]. Diversity and
Evolution of Plants. CABI Publishing, Wallingford, UK.

Takhtajan, A. 1997. Diversity and Classification of Plants. Columbia
University Press, New York.

Walker, J. W. and J. A. Doyle. 1975. The bases of angiosperm phylogeny:
palynology. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 62:664-723.

Worsdell, W. C. 1908. The affinities of Paeonia. Journal of Botany
46:114-116.

##### Title Illustrations

![Fothergilla major](Fothergilla_major00683_002.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Fothergilla major
  Comments          Hamamelidaceae
  Copyright ::         © [Kurt Stüber](http://www.biolib.de/) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
![Sempervivum montanum ](Sempervivum_montanum3001_002.jpg)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::   Sempervivum montanum
  Location ::         San Bernardino, Mesocco, Ticino, Switzerland, 2100 m
  Comments           Crassulaceae
  Acknowledgements   courtesy [Botanical Image Database](http://www.unibas.ch/botimage/)
  Copyright ::          © 2001 University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
![](Saxifraga_cochlearis01365_002.txt)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Saxifraga cochlearis
  Comments          Saxifragaceae
  Copyright ::         © [Kurt Stüber](http://www.biolib.de/) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------