---
title: Uroteuthis
---

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Loliginidae](Loliginidae)
    -   [Myopsida](Myopsida)
    -   [Decapodiformes](Decapodiformes)
    -   [Coleoidea](Coleoidea)
    -   [Cephalopoda](Cephalopoda)
    -   [Mollusca](Mollusca)
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Loliginidae
    -   [Loligo](Loligo)
    -   [Afrololigo mercatoris](Afrololigo_mercatoris)
    -   [Alloteuthis](Alloteuthis)
    -   [Doryteuthis](Doryteuthis)
    -   [Heterololigo bleekeri](Heterololigo_bleekeri)
    -   [Loliolus](Loliolus)
    -   [Lolliguncula](Lolliguncula)
    -   [Pickfordiateuthis](Pickfordiateuthis)
    -   [Sepioteuthis](Sepioteuthis)
    -   Uroteuthis

-   » Sub-Groups 

# *Uroteuthis* [Rehder, 1945] 

[Michael Vecchione]()

![ ](Photolol.jpg)

The following fourteen nominal species, divided into three subgenera,
are presently included in ***Uroteuthis***; however this generic and
subgeneric arrangement is controversial.

Type species.\--***Uroteuthis bartschi*** Rehder, 1945, by original
designation.

Containing group: [Loliginidae](Loliginidae.md)

## Introduction

These common inshore squids of the Indo-West Pacific are targets of
important large-scale and artesanal fisheries. ***Uroteuthis*** spp. are
the only squids in the Loliginidae that possess photophores.

#### Diagnosis

A loliginid \...

-   with a pair of photophores on the ink sac.

### Characteristics

1.  Arms
    1.  Proximal margin of sucker rings with semicrescent plate; distal
        margin with square teeth.
    2.  Hectocotylus:
        1.  Two rows of papillae present.\
            \
2.  Tentacles
    1.  Tentacular clubs expanded, suckers in four series.\
        \
3.  Mantle
    1.  Mantle generally elongate and pointed posteriorly.\
        \
4.  Fins
    1.  Fins in adults generally rhomboidal and longer than broad,
        tapering posteriorly.
    2.  Fins may or may not reach posterior tip of mantle.\
        \
5.  Photophores
    1.  Pair of organs on ventral surface of ink sac; intestine
        separates members of the pair.\
        \
6.  Viscera
    1.  Eggs small.
    2.  Spermatophore cement body short.

#### Comments

***Uroteuthis (Uroteuthis)*** is distinguished from the other two
subgenera by a greatly elongate \"tail\" with \"lateral\" fins which to
not extend to the tip of the tail. In ***Uroteuthis (Photololigo)*** and
***Uroteuthis (Aestuariolus)*** the elongation of the posterior mantle
is variable but not tail-like and when the mantle is elongate, the fins
extend along the sides to the posterior tip.

![ ](UroBartchiHolo.jpg)

**Figure**. Dorsolateral view of ***U. (U.) bartchi***, holotype, 199 mm
ML, male, preserved, Philippine waters at 06°05\'N, 121°00\'E, showing
elongate tail and lateral fins. The bend in the tail is an artifiact of
preservation. Photograph by R. Young.

***Uroteuthis (Photololigo)*** differs from ***Uroteuthis
(Aestuariolus)*** in that the modified portion of hectocotylus is less
than entire arm; that is, the proximal portion is not modified. In
***Uroteuthis (Aestuariolus)*** the entire arm is modified. The
structure of the photophores also differs somewhat between the two
subgenera.\

![ ](UroNoctilucaHecto.jpg){width="557"}

**Figure**. **Top** - Oral view of the hectocotylus of ***Uroteuthis
(Photololigo) edulis***, 73 mm ML, male, preserved, East China Sea at
21°42\'N, 114°50\'E, preserved. Note the normal suckers in the proximal
region of the arm. **Bottom** - Oral view of the hectocotylus of
***Uroteuthis (Aestuariolus) nocticula*** , 53 mm ML, male, preserved,
Bass Strait, Australia at 37°51\'S, 144°56\'E. Note that only modified
suckers are in the proximal region of the arms. Photographs by R. Young.

![ ](UroNoctiluca.jpg)

**Figure**. Dorsal view of ***Uroteuthis (Aestuariolus) noctiluca***,
paratype, preserved. Photograph by R. Young.
### Nomenclature

From Vecchione et al., 1998:

The pair of photophores on the ventral surface of the ink sac in all of
these species is perhaps the strongest indication of a close
relationship among species to be found in this family. This relationship
is further supported by similarities in the hectocotylus and arm-sucker
dentition. These characters led Natsukari (1984) to establish the genus
***Photololigo*** for the Indo-West Pacific species with photophores,
formerly assigned to either ***Loligo*** or ***Doryteuthis***. However,
***Uroteuthis bartschi*** also has similar photophores, a similar
hectocotylus and arm suckers, and an Indo-West Pacific distribution. The
elongation of the posterior mantle, which was given generic status in
the description of ***Uroteuthis***, is the extreme example in a cline
of mantle elongation, similar to that found in the eastern Atlantic
where ***Alloteuthis*** is the extreme example. This elongation is so
extreme in ***Uroteuthis*** as to cause a discontinuity in the cline. It
thus warrants separate taxonomic status, but the sole recognized species
in this taxon possesses all of the generic characters of
***Photololigo***. Thus, it should be included in the genus that
Natsukari described. Unfortunately, priority therefore goes to
***Uroteuthis*** as the name of the genus, rather than the more
descriptive ***Photololigo***. Aside from the photophores,
***Uroteuthis*** s.s. and ***Alloteuthis*** can be separated based upon
position of the fins, lateral versus terminal respectively, and
tentacular ring dentition. Therefore, elongation of the mantle end in
these two taxa appears to be analogous, not homologous.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

In a revision of Loliolus, Lu et al. (1985) described a new species:
***L. noctiluca***. They included this species in ***Loliolus*** because
its hectocotylization was a modification of the entire length of the
arm, the original diagnostic character of the genus ***Loliolus***.
However, the hectocotylus of ***L. noctiluca*** is otherwise very
different from those of the other species of ***Loliolus*** in that it
lacks a ventral crest and both the dorsal and ventral rows of suckers
are modified into papillae. The hectocotylus of ***L. noctiluca*** is
thus similar to those of the ***Uroteuthis*** and ***Photololigo***
species except that more of the arm is modified, making it the extreme
in a cline of the percentage of arm length that is modified by
hectocotylization. Furthermore, ***L. noctiluca*** was so named because
of structures on the ink sac believed to be photophores. These
characters, together with similarity in arm-sucker dentition, indicate
that this species should be included in the subgenus ***Photololigo***
of the genus ***Uroteuthis***.

Yeatman (1993) has presented evidence that some species of ***Uroteuthis
(Photololigo)*** are actually species complexes.

### Distribution

The Indo-West Pacific distribution of all of these species supports the
contention that they comprise a natural, closely related species group.

### References

Alexeyev, D.O. 1991. Systematics, Phylogeny, Distribution, Biology, and
Prospects for Fishery of the Squid Suborder Myopsida. Candidate in
Biological Sciences Thesis, Institute of Oceanography of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow. 129 pages. (In Russian).

Alexeyev, D.O. 1992. The Systematic Position of Bioluminescent Squids of
the Family Loliginidae (Cephalopoda, Myopsida). Zoologeskiy Zhurnal,
71(11):12-23. (In Russian).

Lu, C.C., C.F.E. Roper, and R.W. Tait. 1985. A Revision of
***Loliolus*** (Cephalopoda; Loliginidae), Including ***L. noctiluca***,
a New Species of Squid from Australian Waters. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of Victoria, 97(2):59-85.

Natsukari, Y. 1984. Taxonomical and Morphological Studies on the
Loliginid Squids\-- IV. Two New Genera of the Family Loliginidae. Venus,
The Japanese Journal of Malacology, 43(3):229-239.

Vecchione, M., T. F. Brakoniecki, Y. Natsukari and R. T. Hanlon. 1998. A
Provisional Generic Classification of the Family Loliginidae. Smithson.
Contr. Zool., 586

Yeatman, J. 1993. Genetic and Morphological Aspects of Australian
***Photololigo*** spp. (Loliginidae: Cephalopoda). Ph.D. Thesis, James
Cook University, North Queensland, Australia.

## Title Illustrations

![](Photolol.jpg)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Uroteuthis chinensis
  Location ::        off Australia
  Copyright ::         © 1996 [Mark D. Norman](mailto:mnorman@unimelb.edu.au) 
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Uroteuthis.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Mollusca/Cephalopoda/Coleoidea/Decapodiformes/Myopsida/Loliginidae/Uroteuthis.secret.md)

