
# [[Psittaciformes]] 



## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> Parrots (**Psittaciformes**), also known as psittacines, 
> are birds with a strong curved beak, upright stance, and clawed feet. 
> 
> They are classified in four families that contain roughly 410 species in 101 genera, found mostly in tropical and subtropical regions. The four families are the Psittaculidae (Old World parrots), Psittacidae (African and New World parrots), Cacatuidae (cockatoos), and Strigopidae (New Zealand parrots). One-third of all parrot species are threatened by extinction, with a higher aggregate extinction risk (IUCN Red List Index) than any other comparable bird group. Parrots have a generally pantropical distribution with several species inhabiting temperate regions as well. The greatest diversity of parrots is in South America and Australasia.
>
> Parrots—along with ravens, crows, jays, and magpies—are among the most intelligent birds, and the ability of some species to imitate human speech enhances their popularity as pets. They form the most variably sized bird order in terms of length; many are vividly coloured and some, multi-coloured. Most parrots exhibit little or no sexual dimorphism in the visual spectrum.
>
> The most important components of most parrots' diets are seeds, nuts, fruit, buds, and other plant material. A few species sometimes eat animals and carrion, while the lories and lorikeets are specialised for feeding on floral nectar and soft fruits. Almost all parrots nest in tree hollows (or nest boxes in captivity), and lay white eggs from which hatch altricial (helpless) young.
>
> Trapping wild parrots for the pet trade, as well as hunting, habitat loss, and competition from invasive species, has diminished wild populations, with parrots being subjected to more exploitation than any other group of wild birds. As of 2021, about 50 million parrots (half of all parrots) live in captivity, with the vast majority of these living as pets in people's homes. Measures taken to conserve the habitats of some high-profile charismatic species have also protected many of the less charismatic species living in the same ecosystems.
>
> Parrots are the only creatures that display true tripedalism, using their necks and beaks as limbs with propulsive forces equal to or greater than those forces generated by the forelimbs of primates when climbing vertical surfaces. They can travel with cyclical tripedal gaits when climbing.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parrot) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Psittaciformes.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukarya/Animal/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Bird/Psittaciformes.secret.md)

