---
title: Zoantharia
---

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Anthozoa](Anthozoa)
    -   [Cnidaria](Cnidaria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Anthozoa
    -   Zoantharia

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Actiniaria](Actiniaria.md)
    -   [Scleractinia](Scleractinia.md)

# Zoantharia

## Sea Anemones and Corals 

[Daphne G. Fautin, Sandra L. Romano, and William A. Oliver, Jr.]()

![ ](pseudocorynactis.jpg)

Tree derived from Oliver 1996, France et al. 1996, and Chen et al. 1995.

Containing group: [Anthozoa](Anthozoa.md)

### Information on the Internet

[Biogeoinformatics of Hexacorallia](http://www.kgs.ukans.edu/Hexacoral/index.html)

## Introduction

Nearly 4000 of the 6000-plus species of living anthozoans belong to the
six extant orders of subclass Zoantharia (Hyman 1940), also known as
Hexacorallia. The term Hexacorallia for the subclass is used widely in
biology (e.g. Pearse et al. 1987, Brusca and Brusca 1990, Ruppert and
Barnes 1994), although not universally (e.g. Willmer 1990, Meglitsch and
Schram 1991), and morphologically corresponds to the term Octocorallia
used for the other anthozoan subclass also referred to as Alcyonaria.
Use of the term Hexacorallia avoids potential confusion between
Zoantharia and Zoanthiniaria, a term also used for the order Zoanthidea.
On the other hand, paleobiologists use the term Hexacorallia in a more
restrictive sense than do biologists to refer only to Scleractinia, the
order of fossil and contemporary \"stony corals\" with six-fold
symmetry. This use of the term has a morphological counterpart in the
Tetracorallia, an order of fossil corals with four-fold symmetry. Thus,
there are reasons to use each term and reasons not to. We will use
\"Zoantharia\" to refer to this subclass in the Tree of Life.

Zoantharians occur in all seas, from the high intertidal to the deepest
trenches, and from the poles to the equator, although some taxa occur
exclusively in particular types of habitats, such as cerianthids only
subtidally in soft sediments, and ptychodactiarians only at high
latitudes.

### Characteristics

Although the name Hexacorallia has been used for the subclass, almost no
extant members have only six tentacles or mesenteries; rather, the
individual polyp of these cnidarians is typically characterized by
approximately a multiple of six tentacles and mesenteries. Metamorphosis
from the planula larva typically results in a polyp with six
evenly-spaced mesenteries and six tentacles, one communicating with each
intermesenterial space. Mesenteries and tentacles are added as the polyp
grows, but the placement of new structures differs among taxa. The
Zoantharia is a much less cohesive group than the Alcyonaria, some of
its members being skeletal and some askeletal, some being solitary and
some being colonial or clonal.

### Subgroups of Zoantharia

The six extant orders of Zoantharia (and the approximate number of
species in each) according to Dunn (1982) are:

-   Actiniaria (sea anemones; 900 species)
-   Antipatharia (black corals; 150 species)
-   Ceriantharia (tube anemones; perhaps 100 species)
-   Corallimorpharia (coral-like animals that lack a skeleton; 40
    species)
-   Scleractinia (\"stony\" corals; according to Cairns (1999) there are
    about 1314 described species; estimates including undescribed
    species range from 1460 to 2628)
-   Zoanthidea (=Zoanthiniaria) (zoanthids; 250 species)

Antipatharia is the only exclusively colonial order of extant
zoantharians; members of Actiniaria, Ceriantharia, and Corallimorpharia
do not form colonies, although polyps of many corallimorpharian and
actiniarian species can propagate asexually; some scleractinian species
are solitary and some are colonial; zoanthids of most species occur in
beds and mats, but the degree of connection between neighboring polyps
varies.

![ ](antipatharia.jpg)

**Figure 1.** Cerianthid (\"tube anemone\"). Note short inner tentacles
and long outer ones. Photograph copyright © 1999 George Miller. **Figure
2.** Colony of antipatharians (\"black coral\"). Photograph copyright ©
1999 George Miller.

Eight extinct orders of zoantharians have been identified, all from the
Paleozoic (570-245 mya) (Oliver 1996):

-   Cothoniida (cone- or dish-shaped, small, solitary and colonial
    corals; 1-2 genera)
-   Heliolitida (colonial corals with slender corallites; 75 genera)
-   Heterocorallia (solitary, elongate corals; ?5 genera)
-   Kilbuchophyllida (solitary, discoidal corals, with aragonitic
    skeletons; 1 genus)
-   Numidiaphyllida (corals with aragonitic skeletons; 1 genus)
-   Rugosa (solitary and colonial corals; 1000 genera)
-   Tabulaconida (colonial corals; 3 or more genera)
-   Tabulata (colonial corals; 300 genera)

### Variation within Zoantharia

As a polyp of order Ceriantharia (Figure 1) grows, mesenteries are added
in couples, one to each side of a single growth zone. Therefore, the
oldest mesenteries lie diametrically opposite the youngest, which flank
the growth zone. A cerianthid polyp has two circlets of tentacles - one
at the margin of the oral disc and one around the mouth. Thus, for each
couple of mesenteries added, four tentacles are added, two communicating
with each new intermesenterial space. Some antipatharian polyps (Figure
2), being very small, have only six mesenteries and tentacles throughout
life. In species in which mesenteries are added, as many as six are
added, alternating with the initial six.

In stony corals (Scleractinia), sea anemones (Actiniaria), and their
allies, mesenteries occur in pairs. Thus, a newly-metamorphosed polyp
typically has six pairs of primary mesenteries and 12 tentacles, one
arising from the space between the members of each pair of mesenteries
(the \"endocoel\") and one from the space between adjacent pairs (the
\"exocoel\") (Figure 3). As the polyp grows, secondary mesenteries are
added evenly around the circumference, a pair in each exocoel, which
results in an animal with 12 pairs of mesenteries. Simultaneously,
tentacles arise, communicating with the new endocoelic and exocoelic
spaces. In many taxa of zoantharians, a single tentacle communicates
with each exocoel and endocoel, but in some more than one tentacle
communicates with each exocoel and/or endocoel. Addition of a tertiary
cycle of 12 pairs of mesenteries results in a polyp with 24 pairs of
mesenteries and at least 48 tentacles, etc. As the number of mesenteries
and tentacles grow, irregularities inevitably arise, and development may
become asynchronous so that strict hexametry is lost. Mesenteries in
Zoanthidea are added in two growth zones, one on each side of one of the
pairs of primary mesenteries. Hand (1966), for example, considered this
to be evidence zoanthids have paired mesenteries, whereas Grasshoff
(1984) considered the mesenteries to be unpaired.

![ ](cross22.jpg)

**Figure 3.** Cross-sections of a juvenile sea anemone (*Megalactis*
sp.) with three cycles of mesenteries: at left a section at the level of
the actinopharynx, at right a section nearer the base. **1** indicates
primary mesenteries, of which there are six pairs; **2** indicates
secondary mesenteries, of which there are six pairs; and **3** indicates
tertiary mesenteries, of which there are 12 pairs. In this example, the
primary mesenteries are complete (they connect to the actinopharynx, as
in the left-hand image), whereas the secondary and tertiary mesenteries
are incomplete (they do not connect to the actinopharynx). Polyps of
some species have fewer cycles of mesenteries and some have many more,
and the number of cycles of complete mesenteries varies; these are all
characters of systematic importance.\
Image copyright © 2000 Adorian Ardelean.

Two orders of living zoantharians have skeletons - the Scleractinia and
the Antipatharia. The rigid scleractinian skeleton, which lies external
to the polyps that make it, is composed of calcium carbonate in the
crystal form aragonite (Milliman 1974). Much of the framework of coral
reefs is formed by scleractinians. The antipatharian skeleton lies
internal to the polyps that make it, and, being composed largely of
organic material, is flexible (Goldberg 1976). Sea anemones of one
genus, *Galatheanthemum*, secrete an external chitinous tube; some other
actiniarians, particularly those living in the deep sea, secrete
chitinous material that clings to the body but that does not have the
integrity of a tube. Cerianthids burrow into soft sediments, and
construct a tube that incorporates mud into a feltwork of discharged
cnidae of a type unique to members of that order \-- the ptychocyst
(Mariscal et al. 1977). Polyps belonging to Corallimorpharia do not
secrete a skeleton or tube of any kind. Although zoanthids do not
produce a skeleton either, they incorporate into the mesoglea of their
body walls exogenous material such as sand grains and sponge spicules.

The skeleton of an individual scleractinian polyp is known as a
corallite. Each of its radially-aligned elements, termed septa, lies in
the endocoel flanked by the members of a mesenterial pair. Septa are
secreted by the mesenteries and are therefore added in the same order as
the mesenteries. As a result, septa of different ages are adjacent to
one another, and the symmetry of the scleractinian skeleton is radial or
biradial. This pattern of septal insertion is termed „cyclic‰ by
paleontologists (Figure 4 right). By contrast, in some fossil corals,
adjacent septa lie in order of increasing age, a pattern that is termed
serial (Figure 4 left) and that produces a bilateral symmetry.

![ ](oliver.jpg)

**Figure 4.** Septal arrangements in anthozoan corals: left, serial;
right, cyclic. Serial and cyclic insertion of septa are fundamentally
different. Modified from Oliver (1996). Copyright © 1996 The
Paleontological Society.

#### Fossil Zoantharia

The eight extinct orders of zoantharians (Oliver 1996) are known almost
exclusively from their fossil skeletons, all of which were calcitic
except those of Kilbuchophyllida and Numidiaphyllida, which were
probably aragonitic (Scrutton 1997). Corallites of order Tabulata (Early
Ordovician \[500 mya\] to Late Permian \[250 mya\]) have poorly
developed septa and slender corallites crossed by many tabulae
(horizontal skeletal elements between septa). Larger tabulates were
relatively important in Paleozoic reefs but were not really
frame-builders as they had no proper means of attachment (Clarkson
1986); smaller tabulates lived in deeper and colder waters (Hill and
Stumm 1956; Clarkson 1986). The Rugosa (Middle Ordovician to Late
Permian) consists of corals in which septa were inserted serially
(Figure 4). Once they evolved, they spread throughout the oceans
relatively quickly (Hill and Stumm 1956). It is thought that solitary
rugosans preferred soft substrates, having had no effective means of
anchorage on the sea floor; colonial rugosans did not normally fix
themselves to the sea floor, either, and so were seldom frame-builders
of Paleozoic reefs but were found both in and near reef habitats
(Clarkson 1986). Rugose corals are thought to have been very sensitive
to environmental conditions (Clarkson 1986).

Kilbuchophyllida (Middle Ordovician \[470 mya\]) consists of corals that
show hexameral, cyclic septal insertion (Scrutton and Clarkson 1991).
Members of order Heterocorallia (Late Devonian \[370 mya\] to Early
Carboniferous \[350 mya\]) possess four axially joined protosepta that
subsequently divide to form a Y in cross section, and also have tabulae.
They may have lived pseudo-planktonically, attached to seaweeds (Hill
1956). Those comprising order Cothoniida (Middle Cambrian \[540 mya\])
have an operculum and weak septa. Corals belonging to order Tabulaconida
(Early Cambrian \[570 mya\]) are cerioid (having corallites with shared
walls) or fasciculate (having corallites that are separate from one
another). The order Heliolitida (Middle Ordovician to Middle Devonian
\[380 mya\]) consists of corallites separated by extensive coenosteum
(skeletal elements between corallites).

Knowledge of soft tissue and functional morphology of extinct
skeletalized taxa is entirely by inference. It is assumed that the soft
tissues of extinct skeletalized taxa bore a structural and functional
relationship to the skeleton similar to that in contemporary forms.
Mesenteries of rugosan corals were inserted serially, with four new
septa presumably arising simultaneously, one in each the four quadrants
of the polyp defined by the primary septa. Each developed adjacent to
the youngest septum in the quadrant. Patterns of septal insertion are
used to infer phylogenetic relationships (see below). Although there is
some fossil evidence of soft-bodied zoantharians (e.g. Arai and McGugan
1968; Boyd 1974), knowledge of now-extinct non-skeletalized zoantharians
is likely to remain sparse.

#### Extant Zoantharia

Soft-tissue morphology defines two clear groups of these zoantharians.
Those in which mesenteries occur singly are Antipatharia and
Ceriantharia, but these taxa are not necessarily one another\'s nearest
relatives (see discussion below). The others, in which the mesenteries
occur in pairs (although Grasshoff \[1984\] considered Zoanthidea to
have unpaired mesenteries), presumably constitute a lineage. Hand (1966)
puzzled over the significance of mesenterial pairing. Clearly, a polyp
does not need paired mesenteries to exist or even to attain considerable
size (some cerianthids reportedly attain a length of 35 cm \[Hyman
1940\] and, therefore, presumably reach an oral disc diameter of perhaps
10 cm). Hand (1966) hypothesized the functional signficance of paired
mesenteries is to allow symmetrical contraction of the polyp over the
rigid and potentially sharp septum of a corallite to flush the space
between mesentery and septum. Paired mesenteries serve no function in
corallimorpharians, actiniarians, and zoanthids, he hypothesized, but
indicate their scleractinian ancestry.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Of the nine orders of zoantharians with an exoskeleton, only
Scleractinia still exists. Because they have a relatively good fossil
record, relationships within and among these taxa have been extensively
studied by paleontologists. As a result, coral taxonomy and systematics
have been primarily the province of paleontology, which has led to
systematic and evolutionary hypotheses being based on characteristics of
the skeleton. Hypotheses about relationships among non-skeletalized
groups are based largely on comparisons of polyp morphology. Molecular
methods are now being used to study relationships among skeletalized and
non-skeletalized extant taxa.

Oliver (1996) proposed two major lineages in the Zoantharia based on
comparative morphology (for detailed discussions, see also Scrutton
1997, and included references) as well as stratigraphic position (Figure
5). The Group 1 lineage consists of six extinct orders and possibly the
extant order Zoanthidea. The Group 2 lineage consists of two extinct
orders and three extant ones. Oliver (1996) did not consider the extant
orders Ceriantharia and Antipatharia.

![ ](oliver7.jpg)

**Figure 5.** Proposed phylogeny of fossil zoantharians and some
contemporary taxa. The terms \"Zoanthidea\" and \"Corallimorpharia\" are
used for hypothesized non-skeletalized stem-polyps. Horizontal lines
represent stratigraphic ranges: solid lines are based on fossil
evidence, dashed lines are inferred. Vertical lines represent
evolutionary connections: solid lines are based on fossil evidence,
dashed lines are inferred from other sorts of data. Adapted from Oliver
(1996); copyright © 1996 The Paleontological Society.

In the Group 1 lineage, the Tabulaconida and Cothoniida are hypothesized
to be early skeletalizing \"experiments\" in one or more groups of
non-skeletalized zoantharians. These non-skeletalized ancestors are
commonly referred to as \"anemones\" in the paleontologic literature
(e.g. Oliver 1996); such usage is to be discouraged because it may lead,
consciously or not, to the conclusion that the ancestral animal was
identical to modern members of order Actiniaria. The soft-bodied
ancestor(s) of Group 1 animals had serially inserted mesenteries. This
non-skeletalized stock, which gave rise to the Rugosa during the
Ordovician, could also have been ancestral to the Heterocorallia,
although direct evolution of the Heterocorallia from the Rugosa seems
more likely. Similarities of the problematic Tabulata to the Rugosa
suggest that tabulates may have been derived earlier from the same
non-skeletalized ancestral taxon as the Rugosa. The Heliolitida most
likely had a tabulate ancestor. The Group 1 lineage may have become
extinct, possibly in the Paleozoic, along with the Rugosa and Tabulata,
or it may be represented by the living Zoanthidea, which have (to
paraphrase Hyman 1940, page 623) a mesenterial arrangement unlike that
of any other living anthozoan but somewhat like one that presumably
would have produced the serial septal insertion pattern of the Rugosa
(see Scrutton 1997 for more detailed discussion).

Oliver (1996) proposed that the Group 2 orders evolved from a
non-skeletalized ancestor with cyclic insertion of mesenteries.
Discussion of relationships among Group 2 orders centers around two
matters: 1) the origin of Scleractinia, and 2) whether Scleractinia is
the most derived or the most ancestral of the three living orders in
Oliver\'s (1996) scheme.

There are two main hypotheses about the origin of Scleractinia. The
closest scleractinian analog in the Paleozoic is the Rugosa, which
suggests direct, possibly polyphyletic, descent, with different
scleractinian suborders having originated in different rugosan families
(Schindewolf 1942; Cuif 1977). Schindewolf (1942) interpreted septal
patterns in some Permian corals as representing intermediates between
serial and cyclic septal insertion. Cuif\'s (1977) hypothesis for a
monophyletic origin of Scleractinia and Rugosa largely resulted from his
microstructural analyses of scleractinian and rugosan skeletons. He
argued that ontogenesis of septal formation in both groups provides no
evidence that they were distinct and independent. He presented evidence
that some Paleozoic corals were originally aragonitic, their calcitic
state as fossils being due to recrystallization of the calcium
carbonate.

This hypothesis has largely been eclipsed by the second, which suggests
the similarities of scleractinians to rugosans are due to a common
non-skeletalized ancestor in the early Paleozoic (Scrutton 1997). Three
lines of evidence against direct descent of Scleractinia from Rugosa
were detailed by Oliver (1980; 1996 and included references). The
strongest line is that rugosan septal insertion is serial and bilateral
for both major and minor septa, whereas scleractinian insertion is
cyclic and either bilateral or radial (Figure 2). The second line of
evidence is that rugosan skeletons were composed of calcite;
scleractinian skeletons are, and apparently always have been, composed
of aragonite. The third is that the most recent rugosans lived in latest
Permian times whereas the earliest scleractinians appeared in the Middle
Triassic.

Recently discovered Paleozoic corals with aragonitic skeletons and
cyclic septal insertion - two features that characterize Scleractinia -
have strengthened the hypothesis for an independent origin of the
Scleractinia. Kilbuchophyllida is thought to represent an early,
ultimately unsuccessful experiment in skeletalization by a group of
non-skeletalized anthozoans that later gave rise to Scleractinia
(Scrutton and Clarkson 1991). Likewise, *Numidiaphyllum* from the Upper
Permian of Tunisia has been described as aragonitic (Wendt 1990) with
cyclic septal insertion (Ezaki 1997).

Molecular analyses are beginning to contribute data to the debate on the
origin of the Scleractinia. A study of scleractinian relationships based
on sequences of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) (Romano and Palumbi 1996)
supports the hypothesis that a scleractinian-like skeleton originated
more than once. These data suggest that two major lineages of
Scleractinia diverged from each other before the first appearance of the
scleractinian skeleton in the fossil record, a conclusion that is
consistent with data from fossils (e.g. Wells 1956). However, the two
lineages defined by molecular and fossil data are not entirely
coincident. Also unresolved is the issue of whether only the skeleton of
Scleractinia is polyphyletic or whether the taxon itself is.

In the debate on the origin of Scleractinia, the preponderance of
evidence supports an origin independent of the Rugosa (e.g. Ezaki 1998).
This conclusion bears on discussions of the relationships among
Scleractinia, Corallimorpharia, and Actiniaria, and has been interpreted
as support for the hypothesis that scleractinians are derived from
corallimorpharians or actiniarians. Wells and Hill (1956) classified
these three groups as suborders in order Hexactiniaria, with
Scleractinia being more closely related to Actiniaria than to
Corallimorpharia based on the relationship of tentacles to mesenteries.
Oliver (1996) hypothesized the Scleractinia evolved from a group of
non-skeletalized zoantharians similar to the Corallimorpharia. Some
molecular analyses lend support to the hypothesis that Scleractinia is
derived from Corallimorpharia or Actiniaria. In an analysis of anthozoan
relationships based on sequences of the nuclear ribosomal 28S gene (Chen
et al. 1995), Scleractinia forms a monophyletic group that is derived in
relation to Corallimorpharia and Actiniaria. Moreover, in this analysis
neither Actiniaria nor Corallimorpharia is monophyletic - some
representatives of each order are more closely related to
representatives of the other order than to representatives of the same
order (Figure 6).

         ============================ Ceriantharia 
         |
         |     =======Actiniaria===== Entacmaea quadricolor 
         |     |
         |  ===|  =================== Corallimorpharia
         |  |  ===|
    <<===|  |     =================== Actiniaria
         ===|
            |     ==Corallimorpharia= Corynactis viridis 
            |  ===|
            ===|  =================== Actiniaria
               |
               ====================== Scleractinia 

**Figure 6.** Phylogeny derived from 28S ribosomal RNA sequences (from
Chen et al. 1995).

An alternative hypothesis for the relationship of Scleractinia to the
extant, non-skeletalized zoantharians is that the soft-bodied groups are
derived from scleractinians by the loss of the skeleton. Data that
support this hypothesis are from soft-tissue morphology and molecular
analyses. Polyps of Corallimorpharia are virtually identical to those of
Scleractinia morphologically; they differ mainly in corallimorpharians
lacking skeletons. Hand (1966) interpreted these similarities (including
of cnidom \[types of cnidae\]) as indicating more recent descent of
Corallimorpharia from its scleractinian ancestor than of Actiniaria and
Zoanthidea. Using radioimmunoassay of whole animals representing four
orders of Zoantharia, Fautin and Lowenstein (1993) and Buddemeier and
Fautin (1996) also concluded that Scleractinia is ancestral to
Actiniaria and Corallimorpharia, and that those three taxa form a
monophyletic group relative to Ceriantharia. In the more comprehensive
analysis (Buddemeier and Fautin 1996), one scleractinian is more closely
related to the three corallimorpharians than to the four other
scleractinians, and Actiniaria forms a monophyletic group (Figure 7). A
rate of change in immunological distance was calculated based on the
well-established divergence time from the fossil record of two
scleractinian genera included in the analysis. This rate was then used
to determine divergence times among other taxa in the analysis. This
estimate is believed to be reasonably accurate even though it will
underestimate the time of divergence for higher taxa because the
proportionality between immunological distance and time diminishes with
time (Lowenstein 1981). Buddemeier and Fautin (1996) estimated from this
analysis that actiniarian and scleractinian/corallimorpharian lineages
diverged 75 mya, and the corallimorpharian lineage diverged from the
scleractinian lineage 55 mya. Since the scleractinian fossil record goes
back 240 my, these immunological data support the hypothesis that
Scleractinia is ancestral to both Actiniaria and Corallimorpharia. The
greater morphological similarity of corallimorpharians to scleractinians
than of actiniarians to scleractinians is consistent with the hypothesis
that corallimorpharians were derived more recently from scleractinians
than were actiniarians.

         =============================== Ceriantharia 
         |
         |  ============================ Scleractinia 
         |  |
         |  |========Scleractinia======= Tubastraea 
         |  |
    <<===|  |        ====Scleractinia=== Fungiacyathus 
         ===|     ===|
            |=====|  ==Corallimorpharia= Rhodactis 
            |     |
            |     ====================== Corallimorpharia
            |
            ============================ Actiniaria

**Figure 7.** Phylogeny derived from radioimmunoassay data (from
Buddemeier and Fautin 1996).

Two mechanisms have been proposed for the evolution of non-skeletalized
zoantharians from scleractinians: a polyp may leave its skeleton, or it
may not produce one (Fautin and Lowenstein 1993). Scleractinian polyps
can abandon their skeletons (Goreau and Goreau 1959, Sammarco 1982,
Kramarsky-Winter et al. 1997). Carbonate saturation state of the ocean
may affect a coral\'s ability to form skeletons (Smith and Buddemeier
1992, Gattuso et al. 1999); lowered saturation states correlate with the
periods during which non-skeletalized zoantharians are inferred to have
arisen based on immunological data (Buddemeier and Fautin 1996). It is
possible that some of the apparent gaps in the fossil record of
particular scleractinian lineages are due to there having been times
when the corals ceased forming skeletons altogether, or formed fragile
ones that were not preserved, and then, when circumstances changed,
resumed precipitating more massive skeletons (see Veron 1995).

Analysis of sequences of the mitochondrial ribosomal 16S gene also
provides some support for the hypothesis that Scleractinia is more
closely related to Corallimorpharia than either is to Actiniaria. In a
study of anthozoan relationships involving 29 species in five orders,
France et al. (1996) found Actiniaria to be monophyletic while
Corallimorpharia and Scleractinia together form a monophyletic group
(Figure 8). One representative of Scleractinia is more closely related
to the one representative of Corallimorpharia in the analysis than to
the other representative of Scleractinia. Berntson et al. (1999)
analyzed complete nuclear ribosomal 18S sequences from all orders of
anthozoans. This most complete of the molecular datasets available, in
terms of number of characters and taxon sampling, also supports the
hypothesis that Corallimorpharia is more closely related to Scleractinia
than to Actiniaria. Scleractinia and Actiniaria is each monophyletic;
Corallimorpharia is not monophyletic and, although it is most closely
related to Scleractinia, its relative placement - basal to or within
Scleractinia \-- is unresolved.

         ========================================= Octocorallia 
         |
         |            ============================ Ceriantharia 
         |            |
         |            |        ==Corallimorpharia= Corynactis californica 
         |            |     ===|
    <<===|            |  ===|  ====Scleractinia=== Enallopsammia rostrata 
         ==Zoantharia=|  |  |
                      ===|  ======Scleractinia==== Favia fragum 
                         |
                         |  ====================== Actiniaria 
                         ===|
                            ====================== Antipatharia 

**Figure 8.** Phylogeny derived from 16S ribosomal RNA sequences (from
France et al. 1996).

The hypotheses that Corallimorpharia and Scleractinia are more closely
related to each other than either is to Actiniaria (e.g. Hand 1966,
Schmidt 1974, Fautin and Lowenstein 1993, France et al. 1996), and that
Corallimorpharia does not constitute an order separate from Scleractinia
are hardly novel. In 1898, Duerden invoked several earlier anemone
specialists in arguing that corallimorpharians are merely skeletonless
scleractinians. Moreover, he found his study \"as suggestive of an
ancestry in which a skeleton was present\...\" (page 640), although he
acknowledged late in the paper that the reverse might have been the
case. Stephenson (1921) concluded \"There has been a growing feeling
among those who have worked at anemones that there is a good deal of
inter-relation between them and the corals, and that we can no longer
insist on a separation of them based on presence or absence of a
skeleton alone.\" He went on to suggest that corallimorpharians be put
into Madreporaria (a name then used for Scleractinia).

Clearly, Scleractinia ultimately evolved from some soft-bodied
anthozoan, but this need not have been a member of a currently-extant
order. Moreover, if paired mesenteries were a preadaptation to the
deposition of a calcareous skeleton, it is unclear which of the several
non-skeletalized groups with paired mesenteries should be considered
ancestral, and why the trait should have arisen.

In summary, the available data support the hypothesis that
Corallimorpharia, Actiniaria, and Scleractinia are very closely related
to each other, but which two are more closely related and what the
ancestor-descendant relationship is remain equivocal. The three groups
seem to have been derived from a single lineage of non-skeletalized
zoantharians, and skeletalization appears to have evolved in this
lineage more than once. Perhaps more molecular data or data of higher
resolution will resolve the relationships among these taxa.

The relationship of Ceriantharia and Antipatharia to other orders of
extant Zoantharia has also been a subject of debate. Analyses of
nematocysts (Schmidt 1974) and molecules (France et al. 1996, Song and
Won 1997, Berntson et al. 1999) support the hypothesis that Ceriantharia
and Antipatharia are not one another\'s nearest relatives, and therefore
do not constitute a subclass of their own separate from the Zoantharia.
Data collected by Schmidt (1974), France et al. (1996), and Berntson et
al. (1999) support the hypothesis that Ceriantharia is the most basal
group of Zoantharia. Analyses of nuclear ribosomal sequences (Song et
al. 1994, Chen et al. 1995, Song and Won 1997) place Ceriantharia basal
to both Zoantharia and Alcyonaria, whereas an analysis of mitochondrial
sequences (France et al. 1996) places Ceriantharia in a monophyletic
group with other zoantharian orders. Analysis of nuclear 18S ribosomal
sequences by Berntson et al. (1999) also supports a basal position of
Ceriantharia within Zoantharia but does not establish its position
within Anthozoa with statistical certainty: Ceriantharia is equally
likely to be related to any anthozoan order, but it may merit subclass
status. As for all analyses, some conflicting results may be due to
problems of taxon sampling - few analyses include representatives of all
orders and/or many lack more than one representative of some of the
orders sampled.

Morphological and molecular data support a sister relationship between
Antipatharia and Zoanthidea. Schmidt (1974) proposed this hypothesis
based on nematocysts. France et al. (1996) found Antipatharia and
Actiniaria to be sister groups using mitochondrial sequence data, but
they included no zoanthideans in the analysis. However, analyses by
Berntson et al. (1999), which included representatives of all orders of
Zoantharia, not only establish the affinity of Antipatharia to
Zoantharia, but support the hypothesis that Antipatharia is most closely
related to Zoanthidea.

Molecular (Berntson et al. 1999) and morphological (Cappola and Fautin
2001) data have resolved the status of Ptychodactiaria, a taxon
consisting of three species of high-latitude soft-bodied zoantharians
that had been considered to be an order (Carlgren 1949). The molecular
analysis (Berntson et al. 1999) places the group within Actiniaria. The
morphological features used to distinguish the two taxa do not do so:
some features are found in both Ptychodactiaria and Actiniaria, and
others do not actually exist, so Cappola and Fautin (2001) considered
Ptychodactiaria to be a suborder of abasilar actiniarians.

### References

Arai, M. N. and A. McGugan. 1968. A problematical coelenterate(?) from
the Lower Cambrian, near Moraine Lake, Banff area, Alberta. Journal of
Paleontology 42:205-209.

Bayer, F. M. 1956. Octocorallia. Pages F166-F230 in: R. C. Moore (ed.),
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology Part F: Coelenterata. Geological
Society of America and University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Bayer, F. M., M. Grasshoff, and J. Verseveldt. 1983. Illustrated
trilingual glossary of morphological and anatomical terms applied to
Octocorallia. E. J. Brill / Dr. W. Backhuys, Leiden. 75 pages.

Berntson, E. A., S. C. France, and L. S. Mullineaux. 1999. Phylogenetic
relationships within the Class Anthozoa (Phylum Cnidaria) based on
nuclear 18S rDNA sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 13:
417-433.

Boyd, D. W. 1974. Wyoming specimens of the trace fossil *Bergaueria*.
Contributions to Geology 13:11-15.

Bridge, D., C. W. Cunningham, R. deSalle, and L. W. Buss. 1995.
Class-level relationships in the phylum Cnidaria: molecular and
morphological evidence. Molecular Biology and Evolution 12:679-689.

Brusca, R. C. and G. J. Brusca. 1990. Invertebrates. Sinauer Associates,
Inc. Sunderland, Massachusetts. 922 pages.

Buddemeier, R. W. and D. G. Fautin. 1996. Global CO~2~ and evolution
among the Scleractinia. Pages 33-38 in Biomineralization 93 (Proceedings
of the 7th International Symposium on Biomineralization), Museé
Oceanographiqué Monaco.

Cairns, S. D. 1999. Species richness of Recent Scleractinia. Atoll
Research Bulletin No. 459. 46 pp.

Cappola, V. A. and D. G. Fautin. 2001. All three species of
Ptychodactiaria belong to order Actiniaria (Cnidaria: Anthozoa). Journal
of the Marine Biological Association in press.

Carlgren, O. 1949. A Survey of the Ptychodactiaria, Corallimorpharia and
Actiniaria. Kungl. Svenska Vetenskapsakadamiens Handlingar, Series 4,
Volume 1 (1):1-121.

Chen, C. A., D. M. Odorico, M. ten Lohuis, J. E. N. Veron, and D. J.
Miller. 1995. Systematic relationships within the Anthozoa (Cnidaria:
Anthozoa) using the 5\'-end of the 28S rDNA. Molecular Phylogeny and
Evolution 4:175-183.

Clarkson, E. N. K. 1986. Invertebrate Paleontology and Evolution. Allen
and Unwin, London. 382 pages.

Cuif, J.-P. 1977. Arguments pour une relation phyletiqué entre les
madreporairés Paléozoiqueé et ceux du trias. Memoirés de la Societe
Geologiqué de France, n.s. 129:1-54.

Duerden, J. E. 1898. On the relations of certain Stichodactylinae to the
Madreporaria. Journal of the Linnaean Society of Zoology 26:635-653.

Dunn, D. F. 1981. The clownfish sea anemones: Stichodactylidae
(Coelenterata: Actiniaria) and other sea anemones symbiotic with
pomacentrid fishes. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society
71(1):1-115.

Dunn, D. F. 1982. Cnidaria. Pages 669-706 in S. P. Parker (ed.),
Synopsis and Classification of Living Organisms, Volume 1. McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York and other cities.

Ezaki, Y. 1997. The Permian coral *Numidiaphyllum*: new insights into
anthozoan phylogeny and Triassic scleractinian origins. Palaeontology
40:1-14.

Ezaki, Y. 1998. Paleozoic Scleractinia: progenitors or extinct
experiments? Palaeobiology 24:227-234.

Fautin, D. G. and J. M. Lowenstein. 1993. Phylogenetic relationships
among scleractinians, actinians, and corallimorpharians (Coelenterata:
Anthozoa). Proceedings of the 7th International Coral Reef Symposium
2:665-670.

Fautin, D. G. and R. N. Mariscal. 1991. Cnidaria: Anthozoa. Pages
267-358 in F. W. Harrison and J. A. Westfall (eds.), Microscopic Anatomy
of Invertebrates, volume 2: Placozoa, Porifera, Cnidaria, and
Ctenophora. Wiley-Liss, Inc., New York and other cities.

Fautin, D. G., J. G. Spaulding, and F.-S. Chia. 1989. Cnidaria. Pages
43-62 in K. G. Adiyodi and R. G. Adiyodi (eds.), Reproductive Biology of
Invertebrates, volume 4, part A (Fertilization, Development, and
Parental Care). Oxford and IBH Publ. Co., New Delhi.

France, S. C., P. E. Rosel, J. E. Agenbroad, L. S. Mullineaux, and T. D.
Kocher. 1996. DNA sequence variation of mitochondrial large-subunit rRNA
provides support for a two subclass organization of the Anthozoa
(Cnidaria). Molecular Marine Biology and Biotechnology 5:15-28.

Gattuso, J.-P., D. Allemand, and M. Frankignoulle. 1999. Photosynthesis
and calcification at cellular, organismal and community levels in coral
reefs: a review on interactions and control by carbonate chemistry.
American Zoologist 39(1):160-183.

Goldberg, W. M. 1976. Comparative study of the chemistry and structure
of gorgonian and antipatharian coral skeletons. Marine Biology
35:253-267.

Goreau, T. F. and N. I. Goreau. 1959. The physiology of skeleton
formation in corals. II. Calcium deposition by hermatypic corals under
various conditions in the reef. Biological Bulletin 117:239-250.

Grasshoff, M. 1984. Cnidarian phylogeny - a biomechanical approach.
Palaeontographica Americana 54:127-135.

Hand, C. 1966. On the evolution of the Actiniaria. Pages 135-146 in W.
J. Rees (ed.), The Cnidaria and their Evolution. Academic Press, London
and New York.

Hill, D. 1956. Heterocorallia. Pages F324-F327 in: R. C. Moore (ed.),
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology: Part F: Coelenterata. Geological
Society of America and University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Hill, D. and E. C. Stumm. 1956. Tabulata. Pages F444-F477 in: R. C.
Moore (ed.), Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology: Part F:
Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of Kansas
Press, Lawrence.

Hyman, L. 1940. The Invertebrates. McGraw-Hill, New York. 726 pages.

Hyman, L. H. 1956. Morphology of living coelenterates. Pages F10-F20 in:
R. C. Moore (ed.), Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology: Part F:
Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of Kansas
Press, Lawrence.

Kramarsky-Winter, E., M. Fine, and Y. Loya. 1997. Coral polyp expulsion.
Nature 387:137.

Lowenstein, J. M. 1981. Immunological reactions from fossil material.
Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society, London 292B:143-149.

Mariscal, R. N., E. J. Conklin, and C. H. Bigger. 1977. The ptychocyst,
a major new category of cnida used in tube construction by a cerianthid
anemone. Biological Bulletin 152:392-405.

Meglitsch, P. A. and F. R. Schram. 1991. Invertebrate Zoology, third
edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford and other cities. 623 pages.

Milliman, J. D. 1974. Marine Carbonates. Springer-Verlag, Berlin and
other cities. 373 pages.

Oliver, W. A., Jr. 1980. The relationship of the scleractinian corals to
the rugose corals. Paleobiology 6:146-160.

Oliver, W. A., Jr. 1996. Origins and relationships of Paleozoic coral
groups and the origin of the Scleractinia. Pages 107-134 in G. D. J.
Stanley (ed.), Paleobiology and Biology of Corals. The Paleontological
Society, Columbus, Ohio.

Oliver, W. A., Jr. and A. G. Coates. 1987. Phylum Cnidaria. Pages
140-193 in R. S. Boardman, A.H. Cheetham, and A. J. Rowell (eds.),
Fossil Invertebrates. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Palo Alto,
California.

Pearse, V., J. Pearse, M. Buchsbaum, and R. Buchsbaum. 1987. Living
Invertebrates. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Palo Alto, California.
848 pages.

Romano, S. L. and S. R. Palumbi. 1996. Evolution of scleractinian corals
inferred from molecular systematics. Science 271:640-642.

Romano, S. L. and S. R. Palumbi. 1997. Molecular evolution of a portion
of the mitochondrial 16S ribosomal gene region in scleractinian corals.
Journal of Molecular Evolution 45:397-411.

Ruppert, E. E. and R. D. Barnes. 1994. Invertebrate Zoology, sixth
edition. Saunders College Publishing, Fort Worth and other cities. 1056
pages.

Sammarco, P. W. 1982. Polyp bail-out: an escape response to
environmental stress and a new means of reproduction in corals. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 10:57-65.

Schindewolf, O. H. 1942. Zur Kenntnis der Polycoelien und Plerophyllen.
Eine Studie ueber den Bau der \"Tetrakorallen\" und ihre Beziehungen zu
den Madreporarien. Abhandlungen des Reichsamts fuer Bodenforschung, n.f.
204:1-324.

Schmidt, H. 1974. On evolution in the Anthozoa. Proceedings of the 2nd
International Coral Reef Symposium 1:533-560.

Schuchert, P. 1993. Phylogenetic analysis of the Cnidaria. Zeitschrift
fuer zoologische Systematik und Evolutionsforschung 31:161-173.

Scrutton, C. T. 1997. The Paleozoic Corals, I: origins and
relationships. Proceedings of the Yorkshire Geological Society
51(3):177-208.

Scrutton, C. T. and E. N. K. Clarkson. 1991. A new scleractinian-like
coral from the Ordovician of the southern uplands, Scotland.
Palaeontology 34:179-194.

Shick, J. M. 1991. A Functional Biology of Sea Anemones. Chapman and
Hall, London and other cities. 395 pages.

Smith, S. V. and R. W. Buddemeier. 1992. Global change and coral reef
ecosystems. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 23:89-118.

Song, J.-I., W. Kim, W.K. Kim, and J. Kim. 1994. Molecular phylogeny of
anthozoans (phylum Cnidaria) based on the nucleotide sequences of 18s
rRNA gene. Korean Journal of Zoology 37:343-351.

Song, J.-I. and J. H. Won. 1997. Systematic relationship of the
anthozoan orders based on the partial Nuclear 18s rDNA sequences. Korean
Journal of Biological Sciences 1:43-52.

Stephenson, T. A. 1921. On the classification of Actiniaria. Part
II.-Consideration of the whole group and its relationships, with special
reference to forms not treated in Part I. Quarterly Journal of
Microscopical Science, n.s. 65(260):493-576.

Tixier-Durivault, A. 1987. Sous-classe des Octocoralliaires. Pages 3-185
in D. Doumenc (ed.), Traité de zoologie: anatomie, systematique,
biologie, Volume 3 (Cnidaires, Anthozoaires). Masson, Paris and other
cities.

Veron, J. E. N. 1995. Corals in Space and Time: The Biogeography and
Evolution of the Scleractinia. University of New South Wales Press,
Sydney. 321 pages.

Wedi, S. E. and D. F. Dunn. 1983. Gametogenesis and reproductive
periodicity of the subtidal sea anemone Urticina lofotensis
(Coelenterata: Actiniaria) in California. Biological Bulletin
165:458-472.

Wells, J. W. 1956. Scleractinia. Pages F328-F440 in: R. C. Moore (ed.),
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology: Part F: Coelenterata. Geological
Society of America and University of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Wells, J. W. and D. Hill. 1956. Anthozoa - general features. Pages
F161-F165 in: R. C. Moore (ed.), Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology:
Part F: Coelenterata. Geological Society of America and University of
Kansas Press, Lawrence.

Wendt, J. 1990. The first aragonitic rugose coral. Journal of
Paleontology 64:335-340.

Willmer, P. 1990. Invertebrate Relationships: Patterns in Animal
Evolution. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and other cities. 400
pages.

## Title Illustrations

![](pseudocorynactis.jpg)

  -------------
  Scientific Name ::  Pseudocorynactis caribbeorum
  Copyright ::         © 1999 George Miller
  -------------


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Zoantharia.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Cnidaria/Anthozoa/Zoantharia.secret.md)

