---
title: Gelidiales
---

## Phylogeny 


-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Florideophyceae](Florideophyceae)
    -   [Rhodophyta](Rhodophyta)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Florideophyceae
    -   [Ceramiales](Ceramiales)
    -   Gelidiales

-   » Sub-Groups 

# Gelidiales 

[D. Wilson Freshwater](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![Gelidiella acerosa](gacer_002.jpg)
![](grancanar.jpg)

Tree based on Freshwater et al. 1995, Freshwater and Bailey 1998,
Shimada et al. 1999, Rico et al. 2002, and Freshwater unpublished. Clade
labels refer to the type of morphology and development of the female
reproductive system and carposporophyte as discussed in Bailey and
Freshwater (1997).

Containing group: [Florideophyceae](Florideophyceae.md)

### Introduction

The Gelidiales is a relatively small order of red algae containing ca.
130-140 species placed in ten recognized genera. Many gelidialean
species are economically important as sources of high quality agars. The
order is defined by the unique set of characters listed below.

### Characteristics

Species within the Gelidiales share a unique set of characters that make
this a well-defined order of red algae. These characters include:

-   a triphasic life history with isomorphic gameto- and
    tetrasporophytes
-   agar as a cell wall component
-   pit plugs with a single cap layer
-   a special \"Gelidium-type\" spore germination pattern
-   uniaxial filaments that branch in three planes forming a
    pseudoparenchyma
-   intercalary carpogonia that after fertilization produce gonimoblasts
    that connect to nutritive cells
-   transversely divided spermatangia

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Four major lineages have been identified by molecular analyses of taxa
within the Gelidiales (Bailey and Freshwater 1997, Freshwater et al.
1995, Freshwater and Bailey 1998, Shimada et al. 1999). The morphology
and development of the female reproductive system and carposporophyte
may also define these lineages (Bailey and Freshwater 1997, Hommersand
and Fredericq 1988, 1996, Santelices and Hommersand 1997). Three of the
lineages are equivalent to the monophyletic genera Pterocladiella,
Pterocladia, and Gelidiella. The fourth lineage defines a large clade
that includes species of Acanthopeltis, Capreolia, Gelidium,
Porphyroglossum, and Ptilophora. As noted on the Gelidiales tree above,
species representing four other genera are also resolved within this
lineage, but recent studies have synonimized these with currently
recognized genera (Norris 1987, Shimada et al. 1999, Tronchin et al.
2003a). Analyses of nuclear-encoded 28S rRNA gene sequence data
(Freshwater and Bailey 1998) and a combined four gene data set
(Freshwater unpublished) have resolved Pterocladia and Pterocladiella as
sister taxa, but relationships among the four major lineages can not
currently be determined based upon non-molecular characters. The
morphology and development of the Gelidiella female reproductive system
and carposporophyte is unknown, and therefore the associated characters,
which define the other three lineages, cannot be used to determine
phylogenetic relationships among them.

Most species included in molecular analyses have been resolved within
the \"Gelidium\" lineage. As noted above, this lineage includes species
of not only Gelidium, but four other currently recognized genera as
well. Molecular analyses identify at least eight clades within this
lineage that have been referred to as \"species complexes\" or \"species
clades\" (Freshwater and Rueness 1994, Freshwater et al. 1995, Shimada
et al. 1999, Tronchin et al. 2003a). In contrast to the four major
gelidialean lineages, morphological and/or developmental synapomorphies
are unverified for all but the Ptilophora clade. The vegetative thalli
of all species in the Ptilophora clade are constructed of four tissue
layers composed of different cell types (Tronchin et al. 2003b).
Santelices (1999) has defined a number of characters associated with the
development of the cystocarp that may be synapomorphies for species
clades within the \"Gelidium\" lineage. Further study is needed to
determine if these or other characters will be useful for phylogenetic
analyses.

### References

Bailey, J.C. and D.W. Freshwater. 1997. Molecular systematics of the
Gelidiales: Inferences from separate and combined analyses of plastid
rbcL and nuclear SSU gene sequences. Eur. J. Phycol. 32:343-352.

Fan, K.-C. 1961. Morphological studies of the Gelidiales. University of
California Publications in Botany 32:315-368.

Freshwater, D.W. and J. Rueness. 1994. Phylogenetic relationships of
some European Gelidium (Gelidiales, Rhodophyta) species based on rbcL
nucleotide sequence analysis. Phycologia 33:187-194.

Freshwater, D.W. and J.C. Bailey. 1998. A multigene phylogeny of the
Gelidiales including nuclear large-subunit rRNA sequence data. J. Appl.
Phycol. 10:229-236.

Freshwater, D.W., S. Fredericq and M.H. Hommersand. 1995. A molecular
phylogeny of the Gelidiales (Rhodophyta) based on analysis of plastid
rbcL nucleotide sequences. J. Phycol. 31:616-632.

Hommersand, M.H. and S. Fredericq. 1988. An investigation of cystocarp
development in Gelidium pteridifolium with a revised description of the
Gelidiales (Rhodophyta). Phycologia 27:254-272.

Hommersand, M.H. and S. Fredericq. 1996. Vegetative and reproductive
development of Pterocladia capillacea (Gelidiales, Rhodophyta) from La
Jolla, California. Nova Hedwigia 112:147-160.

Norris, R.E. 1987. A re-evaluation of Ptilophora Kutzing and Beckerella
Kylin (Gelidiales, Rhodophyceae) with a review of South African species.
Botanica Marina 30:243-258.

Rico, J.M., D.W. Freshwater, K.G. Norwood and M.D. Guiry. 2002.
Morphology and systematics of Gelidiella tenuissima (Gelidiales,
Rhodophyta) from Gran Canaria (Canary Islands, Spain). Phycologia 41,
463-469.

Santelices, B. 1988. Synopsis fo biological data on the seaweed genera
Gelidium and Pterocladia (Rhodophyta). FAO Fisheries Synopsis 145, 55
pp.

Santelices, B. 1999. Patterns of carposporangial production among
species of Gelidium (Gelidiales, Rhodophyta). Pages 55-69 in Taxonomy of
economic seaweeds with reference to some Pacific species, Volume VII
(I.A. Abbott, ed.). California Sea Grant College System, La Jolla,
California.

Santelices, B. and M.H. Hommersand. 1997. Pterocladiella, a new genus in
the Gelidiaceae (Gelidiales, Rhodophyta). Phycologia 36:114-119.

Shimada, S., T. Horiguchi and M. Masuda. 1999. Phylogenetic affinities
of genera Acanthopeltis and Yatabella (Gelidiales, Rhodophyta) inferred
from molecular analyses. Phycologia 38:528-540.

Tronchin, E.M., D.W. Freshwater, J.J. Bolton and R.J. Anderson. 2003a. A
reassessment and reclassification of species in the genera Onikusa
Adatsuka and Suhria J. Agardh ex Endlicher (Gelidiales, Rhodophyta)
based on molecular and morphological data. Botanica Marina (in press).

Tronchin, E.M., D.W. Freshwater and J.J. Bolton. 2003b. A re-evaluation
of species in the genera Beckerella and Ptilophora (Gelidiales,
Rhodophyta) based on molecular and morphological data. Phycologia (in
press).

##### Title Illustrations

![Gelidiella acerosa](gacer.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Gelidiella acerosa
  Location ::        collected at Cahuita on the Caribbean coast of Costa Rica
  Comments          5 Colones coin = 2 cm
  Copyright ::         © 2002 [D. Wilson Freshwater](mailto:freshwaterw@uncw.edu) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
![Gelidium arbuscula](grancanar_002.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::   Gelidium arbuscula
  Location ::         collected on the north coast of Gran Canaria, Canary Islands
  Acknowledgements   Hand model courtesy of Jose Rico
  Copyright ::          © 2002 [D. Wilson Freshwater](mailto:freshwaterw@uncw.edu) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------