---
title: Morinaceae
---

## Phylogeny 


-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Dipsacales](../Dipsacales.md)
    -   [Asterids](../../Asterids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [Eudicots](../../../../Eudicots.md)
    -   [Flowering_Plant](../../../../../Flowering_Plant.md)
    -   [Seed_Plant](../../../../../../Seed_Plant.md)
    -   [Land_Plant](../../../../../../../Land_Plant.md)
    -   [Green plants](../../../../../../../../Plants.md)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Dipsacales
    -   [Adoxaceae](Adoxaceae.md)
    -   Morinaceae
    -   [Valerianaceae](Valerianaceae.md)

-   » Sub-Groups 

# Morinaceae 

[Charles D. Bell](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![ ](Morinaceae/Morina_longifolia04474.jpg)

Containing group: [Dipsacales](../Dipsacales.md)

### Introduction

An excellent taxonomic revision of Morinaceae was published by Cannon
and Cannon in 1984. They recognized 13 species extending from
south-eastern Europe and Israel to the Himalayas of Nepal, Bhutan, and
China, and further east and north in the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. These
plants most often grow at high elevations, sometimes in excess of 4,200
meters, but they occupy a range of habitats, including rock ledges,
alpine meadows, dry slopes, the margins of pine forests, and even
swamps.

### Characteristics

Within Morinaceae, Cannon & Cannon (1984) recognized three genera:
*Morina*, *Acanthocalyx*, and *Cryptothladia*. *Acanthocalyx* has basal,
opposite leaves, corolla lobes that are more or less equal in size, four
fertile stamens, and pollen grains that lack prominent protrusions. In
contrast, *Morina* and *Cryptothladia* share whorled leaves, distinctly
zygomorphyic, 2-lipped corollas with unequal lobes, two fertile stamens
and two reduced sterile stamens, and a unique pollen form with three
prominent equatorial protrusions (Blackmore & Cannon, 1983; Cannon &
Cannon, 1984). *Cryptothladia* differs from *Morina* in having 2-4
corolla lobes as opposed to five, and in that the corolla is equal to
or, in most cases, shorter than the calyx. *Cryptothladia* flowers
appear to be predominantly cleistogamous.

Cannon & Cannon (1984) compared Morinaceae to Valerianaceae and
Dipsacaceae, but did not specifically hypothesize relationships among
these groups. Morinaceae have sometimes been united with Dipsacaceae,
and in some treatments are even considered to be a tribe within
Dipsacaceae (e.g., Cronquist, 1988). Such treatments highlight the
presence of a distinctive epicalyx surrounding the ovary in these groups
plus Triplostegia (which has a double epicalyx). Other authors have
highlighted similarities shared by Morinaceae, Valerianaceae, and
Triplostegia, such as the presence of three distinct carpels (two of
which abort), and of clearly zygomorphic corollas. Backlund & Bremer
(1998) summarized the varying taxonomic treatments of the group.

### Relationships of Morinaceae to Other Dipsacales

In recent years a variety of phylogenetic analyses have supported the
monophyly of the Morinaceae and clarified its relationships within
Dipsacales (Caputo & Cozzolino, 1994; Peng et al., 1995; Backlund &
Donoghue, 1996; Backlund & Bremer, 1997; Bell et al., 2001; Donoghue et
al., 2001; Pyck, 2001; Pyck et al., 2002; Donoghue et al., in press;
Zhang et al., in press). The more recent and most comprehensive of these
analyses have agreed that Morinaceae, Valerianaceae, *Triplosetgia*, and
Dipsacaceae form a clade (the Valerina clade of Donoghue et al. 2001),
and that this is in turn united with the Linnaeeae of the traditional
Caprifoliaceae (together forming the Linnina clade of Donoghue et al.,
2001). Within Valerina there have been some differences among
phylogenetic analyses, although these have been weakly supported.
Several analyses combining different data sources have supported the
hypothesis that Morinaceae form the sister group of a clade containing
Valerianaceae plus a clade containing Dipsacaceae plus *Triplostegia*.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

Representatives of the three genera of Morinaceae have been included in
several previous phylogenetic studies (Caputo & Cozzolino, 1994; Peng et
al., 1995; Backlund & Donoghue, 1996; Bell et al., 2001; Donoghue et
al., 2001; Pyck, 2001; Donoghue et al., in press). In all of these
cases, Acanthocalyx has been found to be the sister group of Morina plus
Cryptothladia. However, only one species has been included from each of
these groups, and it has therefore not been possible to test their
monophyly.

### References

Backlund, A. A. & Bremer, K. (1997): Phylogeny of the Asteridae s. str.
based on rbcL sequences, with particular reference to the Dipsacales.
Pl. Syst. Evol. 207:225-254.

Backlund, A. A. & Bremer, K. (1998): To be or not to be- principles of
classification and monotypic plant families. Taxon 47:391-400.

Backlund, A. A. & Donoghue, M. J. (1996): Morphology and phylogeny of
the order Dipsacales. In Phylogeny of the Dipsacales, A. A. Backlund,
Doctoral Dissertation. Uppsala: Department of Systematic Botany, Uppsala
Univ.

Backlund A. A. & Pyck, N. (1998): Diervillaceae and Linnaeaceae, two new
families of caprifolioids. Taxon 47:657-661.

Bell, C. D. and M. J. Donoghue. Phylogeny and biogeography of Morinaceae
(Dipsacales) based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequences. Organisms,
Diversity, and Evolution.

Bell, C. D., Edwards, E. J., Kim, S.-T. & Donoghue, M. J. (2001):
Dipsacales phylogeny based on chloroplast DNA sequences. Harvard Pap. in
Bot. 6:481-499.

Blackmore, S. & Cannon, M. J. (1983): Palynology and systematics of
Morinaceae. Rev. Palaeobot. and Palyn.40:207-226.

Cannon, M. J. & Cannon, J. F. M. (1984): A revision of the Morinaceae
(Magnoliophyta-Dipsacales). Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.) Bot. 12:1-35.

Caputo, P. & Cozzolino, S. (1994): A cladistic analysis of Dipsacaceae
(Dipsacales). Pl. Syst. Evol. 189:41-61.

Cronquist, A. (1988): The Evolution and Classification of Flowering
Plants. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York.

Donoghue, M. J. , Eriksson, T., Reeves, P. A. & Olmstead, R. G. (2001):
Phylogeny and phylogenetic taxonomy of Dipsacales, with special
reference to Sinadoxa and Tetradoxa (Adoxaceae). Harvard Pap. in
Bot.6:459-479.

Donoghue, M. J., Bell, C. D., & Winkworth, R. C. (in press): The
evolution of reproductive characters in Dipsacales. Int. J. Plant Sci.

Hofman, U. & Gottmann, J. (1990): Morina L. und Triplostegia Wall. Ex
DC. Im vergleich mit Valerianaceae und Dipsacaceae. Bot. Jahrb. Syst.
111:499-553.

Judd, W. S., Sanders, R. W. & Donoghue, M. J. (1994): Angiosperm family
pairs preliminary phylogenetiic analyses. Harvard Pap. in Bot. 5:1-51.

Peng, C.-I., Tobe, H. & Takahashi, M. (1995): Reproductive morphology
and relationships of Triplostegia (Dipsacales). Bot. Jahrb. Syst.
116:505-516.

Pyck, N., Roels, P. & Smets, E. (1999): Tribal relationships in
Caprifoliaceae: evidence from a cladistic analysis using ndhF sequences.
Syst. Geogr. Pl. 69:145-159.

Pyck, N. & Smets, E. (2000): A search for the position of the seven-son
flower (Heptacodium, Dipsacales): combining molecular and morphological
evidence. Pl. Syst. Evol. 225:185-199.

Pyck, N., Van Lysebetten, A., Stessens, J. & Smets, E. (2002): The
phylogeny of Patrinieae sensu Grabner (Valerianaceae) revisited:
additional evidence from ndhF sequence data. Pl. Syst. Evol. 233:29-46.

Roels, P. & Smets, E. (1996): A floral ontogenetic study in Dipsacales.
Int. J. Plant Sci. 157:203-218.

Zhang, W-H., Chen, Z-D., Li, J-H., Chen, H-B. & Tang, Y-C. (2003):
Phylogeny of the Dipsacales s.l. based on chloroplast trnL-F and ndhF
sequences. Mol. Phylo. Evol. 26:176-189.

##### Title Illustrations

![](Morina_longifolia04474_002.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Morina longifolia
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Copyright ::            © [Kurt Stüber](http://www.biolib.de/) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------