
# [[Acorn_Computers]]

[#has_/creator :: [ "[[Hauser,Hermann]]", "[[Curry,Chris]]" ] ] 

> Acorn Computers Ltd. was a British computer company established in Cambridge, England, in 1978. 
> The company produced a number of computers which were especially popular in the UK, including the Acorn Electron and the Acorn Archimedes. 
> 
> Acorn's BBC Micro computer dominated the UK educational computer market during the 1980s. 
> 
> Though the company was acquired and largely dismantled in early 1999, 
> with various activities being dispersed amongst new and established companies, 
> its legacy includes the development of reduced instruction set computing (RISC) personal computers. 
> One of its operating systems, RISC OS, continues to be developed by RISC OS Open. 
> 
> Some activities established by Acorn lived on: technology developed by [[Acorn_Computers/ARM(Acorn_RISC_Machine)]]  , 
> created by Acorn as a joint venture with Apple and VLSI in 1990, 
> is dominant in the mobile phone and personal digital assistant (PDA) microprocessor market. 
> 
> Acorn is sometimes referred to as the "British Apple" 
> and has been compared to Fairchild Semiconductor for being a catalyst for start-ups. 
> 
> In 2010, the company was listed by David Meyer in ZDNet as number nine in a feature of top ten "Dead IT giants". 
> Many British IT professionals gained their early experiences on Acorns, 
> which were often more technically advanced than commercially successful US hardware.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acorn%20Computers)

One Problem that Acorn faced over again was the Heat generated by highly integrated Circuits. 
High Integration is crucial to reduce Cost, 
but one consequence was that [[Acorn_Atom]]s Video Chip ran stable only for a few Minutes. 

The same happened for the [[Acorn_Electron]] 
They missed the Home Computer Market at Christmas 1983 
and by 1984 were overtaken by 16 Bit Computers and taken over by [[Olivetti]].

Acorn was named after [[../../../../../../IT/HardWare/HW~Companies/Apple_Inc]] so it comes before them in a Phone Book. 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers](/_Standards/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers.public](/_public/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers.internal](/_internal/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers.protect](/_protect/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers.private](/_private/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers.personal](/_personal/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Acorn_Computers.secret](/_secret/Society/Economics/Business/Business-Entity/IT~Company/Acorn_Computers.secret.md)

