---
title: Rana lessonae
---

## Phylogeny 

-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Western Palearctic water         frogs](Western_Palearctic_water_frogs)
    -   [Rana (Pelophylax)](Rana_%28Pelophylax%29)
    -   [Rana](../../../../Rana.md)
    -   [\'Ranidae\'](%27Ranidae%27)
    -   [Neobatrachia](../../../../../../Neobatrachia.md)
    -   [Salientia](../../../../../../../Salientia.md)
    -   [Living Amphibians](Living_Amphibians)
    -   [Terrestrial Vertebrates](../../../../../../../../../Terrestrial.md)
    -   [Sarcopterygii](../../../../../../../../../../Sarc.md)
    -   [Gnathostomata](../../../../../../../../../../../Gnath.md)
    -   [Vertebrata](../../../../../../../../../../../../Vertebrata.md)
    -   [Craniata](../../../../../../../../../../../../../Craniata.md)
    -   [Chordata](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Chordata.md)
    -   [Deuterostomia](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Deutero.md)
    -   [Bilateria](Bilateria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Western Palearctic water frogs
    -   [Rana saharica](Rana_saharica)
    -   [Rana perezi](Rana_perezi)
    -   [Rana epeirotica](Rana_epeirotica)
    -   [Rana shqiperica](Rana_shqiperica)
    -   Rana lessonae
    -   [Rana cretensis](Rana_cretensis)
    -   [Rana cerigensis](Rana_cerigensis)
    -   [Rana bedriagae](Rana_bedriagae)
    -   [Rana ridibunda](Rana_ridibunda)

-   » Sub-Groups 

# *Rana lessonae* [Camerano 1882] 

[Peter Beerli](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![ ](lessonae/lessonae.jpg)

Containing group: [Western Palearctic water frogs](../../Western Palearctic water frogs)

### Information on the Internet

[Peter Beerli\'s Water Frog Info-Pool](http://waterfrogs.csit.fsu.edu/)

## Introduction

A member of the water frog group with green backs which show black spots
in females. Males are brightly yellowish-green during mating season.
\[More to follow..\]

### Distribution

In the west it extends to the Atlantic Ocean in France, in the north are
a few populations in Sweden, in the northeast the distribution extends
beyond St. Petersburg, the southern border is assumed to be the Danube
in the east. Problematic is the distribution in Italy, the species is
considered to be distributed throughout the Po valley, but seems to be
parapatric with an unnamed peninsular taxon (the peninsular non-hybrid,
D Nei \>= 0.2). In Kalabria Santucci et al. (pers. comm., 1995) found an
other hybrid zone (genetic differences between parental taxa are D Nei =
0.4) suggesting that an other species is occurring in the southermost
Kalabria and Sicily (southern non-hybrid).

### Voice

The following recordings are short sequences of longer recordings. These
files are size reduced (MULAW 8-bit encoded) from 16-bit encoded sound
files.

#### *Rana lessonae*

\[[A single call](http://www.tolweb.org/tree/eukaryotes/animals/chordata/salientia/ranidae/rana_%28pelophylax%29/pbsounds/lessonae.short.au),
[Several calls](http://www.tolweb.org/tree/eukaryotes/animals/chordata/salientia/ranidae/rana_%28pelophylax%29/pbsounds/lessonae.au)\]

#### *Souther non-hybrid*

\[[A single call](http://www.tolweb.org/tree/eukaryotes/animals/chordata/salientia/ranidae/rana_%28pelophylax%29/pbsounds/bergeri.short.au),
[Several calls](http://www.tolweb.org/tree/eukaryotes/animals/chordata/salientia/ranidae/rana_%28pelophylax%29/pbsounds/bergeri.au)\]

### Synonyms

Valid name: *Rana (Pelophylax) lessonae* Camerano 1882

Synonyms: Rana esculenta var. sylvaticus Koch 1872, \"Rana
meridionalis\" Lataste 1876, Rana esculenta acutirostris Lessona 1877,
Rana esculenta obtusirostris Lessona 1877, Rana esculenta var. lessonae
Camerano 1882, \"Rana esculenta var. immaculata\" Camerano 1882, \"Rana
esculenta var. maculata\" Camerano 1882, \"Rana esculenta var.
punctata\" Camerano 1882, \"Rana esculenta var. nigrovittata\" Camerano
1882, Rana esculenta var. bolkayi Fejervary 1909, Rana lessonae
pannonica Karaman 1948.

### References

Beerli, P. 1994. Genetic isolation and calibration of an average protein
clock in western Palearctic water frogs of the Aegean region.
Dissertation Universität Zürich 1994.
\[[Summary](http://www.tolweb.org/accessory/Genetic_Isolation_in_Western_Palearctic_Water_Frogs?acc_id=580)\]

Beerli H. Hotz, H. Tunner, S. Heppich, and T. Uzzell. 1994. Two new
water frog species from the Aegean islands Crete and Karpathos
(Amphibia, Salientia, Ranidae). Notulae Naturae, Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia 470:1-9.

\[see [full text](http://www.tolweb.org/accessory/Two_New_European_Water_Frog_Species?acc_id=581)\]

Berger, L. 1983. Western Palearctic water frogs (Amphibia, Ranidae):
Systematics, genetics and population compositions. Experientia 39(2):
127-130.

Dubois, A., and A. Ohler. 1994. Frogs of the subgenus *Pelophylax*
(Amphibia, Anura, genus *Rana*): a catalogue of available and valid
scientific names, with comments on the name-bearing types, complete
synonymies. proposed common names, and maps showing all type localities.
In: M. Ogielska (Ed.): II International Symposium on Ecology and
Genetics of European water frogs, 18-25 September 1994, Wroclaw, Poland.
Zoologica Poloniae 39(3-4).

Graf, J.-D. and M. Polls Pelaz. 1989. Evolutionary genetics of the *Rana
esculenta* complex. In: Dawley, R.M. and J.P. Bogart (eds.): Evolution
and ecology of unisexual vertebrates. New York State Museum Bulletin
466: 289-302.

Hotz, H. 1983. Genic diversity among water frog genomes inherited with
and without recombination. Ph.D. Thesis University of Zürich. pp. 136.

Santucci, F., G. Nascetti, L. Bullini. 1995. Genetic structure of the
hybridogenetic *Rana esculenta* from Italy. Fifth congress of the
European Socieity for Evolutionary Biology, Edinburgh 4-8 September
1995. \[Abstract\].

## Title Illustrations

![](lessonae.jpg)

  ----------
  Scientific Name ::  Rana lessonae
  Location ::        Switzerland
  Copyright ::         © 1995 Hansjürg Hotz
  ----------


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### [lessonae](/_Standards/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.md) 

### [lessonae.public](/_public/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.public.md) 

### [lessonae.internal](/_internal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.internal.md) 

### [lessonae.protect](/_protect/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.protect.md) 

### [lessonae.private](/_private/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.private.md) 

### [lessonae.personal](/_personal/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.personal.md) 

### [lessonae.secret](/_secret/bio/bio~Domain/Eukaryotes/Animals/Bilateria/Deutero/Chordata/Craniata/Vertebrata/Gnath/Sarc/Tetrapods/Amphibians/Salientia/Neobatrachia/Ranidae/Rana/Pelophylax/Western_Water_Frogs/Rana/lessonae.secret.md)

