---
title: Flabelloidea
---

## Phylogeny 


-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Caryophylliina](Caryophylliina)
    -   [Scleractinia](Scleractinia)
    -   [Zoantharia](Zoantharia)
    -   [Anthozoa](Anthozoa)
    -   [Cnidaria](Cnidaria)
    -   [Animals](Animals)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Caryophylliina
    -   [Caryophyllioidea](Caryophyllioidea)
    -   Flabelloidea

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Flabellidae](Flabellidae)
    -   [Guynia annulata](Guynia_annulata)

# Flabelloidea [Bourne 1905] 

[Stephen D. Cairns](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![ ](Truncatoflabellum_truncum.jpg)

-   *[Flabellidae](Flabellidae)*
-   *[Guyniidae](Guynia_annulata)*

Classification from Wells (1956).

Containing group: [Caryophylliina](Caryophylliina.md)

### Introduction

Representatives of this superfamily occur from the Late Jurassic (135
million years ago) to the Recent, and are widespread in the world oceans
and commonly found as fossils on all continents, including Antarctica.
All known species are azooxanthellate, and occur at depths of 0-3200
meters. Most species are inconspicuous by virtue of small size (as small
as 1 mm calicular diameter) or cryptic and/or deep habitat.
Approximately 110 living species in 18 genera have been described
(Cairns et al., 1999), and about twice that number of fossil species.
All flabelloideans are solitary in growth form; some of them asexually
reproduce by transverse division and various forms of budding. Although
inconspicuous, some occur in large numbers in certain environments.

### Characteristics

The superfamily is characterized by having coralla with a marginothecate
wall, as opposed to a septothecal or parathecal wall of the superfamily
Caryophyllioidea, or the epithecal wall of the Volzeioidea.
Structurally, the marginotheca (Stolarski, 1995) is a primitive,
neotenic wall consisting of vertically arranged minitrabeculae that are
manufactured from the edge zone of the coral. Additional smooth,
non-trabecular calcium carbonate deposits called textura (Stolarski,
1995), literally \"plaster\" in Latin, are often secreted on the outside
of the corallum by the edge zone, and occasionally nontrabecular calcium
carbonate is also deposited within the corallum in a structure called
stereome. The wall of flabelloids is not epithecate, as previously
thought (see Stolarski, 1995), since it consists of trabeculae (epitheca
is nontrabecular) and originates from the edge zone (epitheca originates
from a lappet cavity). Marginotheca is usually quite smooth, often
porcellaneous, but may exhibit low circumferential growth ridges.

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

No phylogenetic analysis has been performed on the suprageneric taxa of
the Caryophylliina. Chevalier (1987) did not acknowledge superfamilies
within the suborder Caryophylliina. Most recently, Stolarski (1995,
2000) has examined the wall microstructure of many of the flabelloid
genera, which led to a redefinition of some wall terminology and will
ultimately lead to the redistribution of some of the genera and even
families within this suborder.

### References

Cairns S. D., B. W. Hoeksema, and J. van der Land. 1999. Appendix: List
of Extant Stony Corals. Atoll Research Bulletin, 459: 13-46.

Cairns S. D. and S. A. Parker. 1992. Review of the Recent Scleractinia
(Stony Corals) of South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania. Records of the
South Australian Museum, Monograph Series, 3: 82 pp.

Chevalier, J.-P. 1987. Ordre des Scléractiniares: Systématique. Pp.
679-753 In: Grassé, P. (editor) Traité de Zoologie, 3(3) Masson, Paris.

Stolarski, J. 1995. Ontogenetic development of the thecal structures in
caryophylliine scleractinian corals. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica, 40:
19-44.

Stolarski, J. 2000. Origin and phylogeny of Guyniidae (Scleractinia) in
the light of microstructural data. Lethaia, 33: 13-38.

Vaughan, T. W. and J. W. Wells. 1943. Revision of the suborders,
families, and genera of the Scleractinia. Geological Society of America,
Special Papers, 44: 363 pp.

Wells, J. W. 1956. Scleractinia. Pp. F328-F444 In: Moore, R. C. (editor)
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology, Part F: Coelenterata. University
of Kansas Press, Lawrence.

##### Title Illustrations

![](Truncatoflabellum_truncum_002.jpg)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Truncatoflabellum truncum
  Location ::           off Chile (depth 1500 m)
  Specimen Condition   Dead Specimen
  Body Part            skeleton, the basal view shows the detachment scar from asexual transverse division
  View                 Calicular and basal views
  Size                 Greater calicular diameter 30 mm
  Copyright ::            © 2002 [Stephen D. Cairns](mailto:cairns.stephen@nmnh.si.edu) 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------