
# [[Commutator]] 


## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> In mathematics, the **Commutator** gives an indication of the extent 
> to which a certain binary operation fails to be commutative. 
> There are different definitions used in group theory and ring theory.
> 
> The commutator of two elements, g and h, of a group G, is the element
> 
> [g, h] = g−1h−1gh.
>
> This element is equal to the group's identity if and only if g and h commute (that is, if and only if gh = hg).
>
> The Commutators of a group are not in general closed under the group operation, 
> but the subgroup of G generated by all commutators is closed and is 
> called the derived group or the commutator subgroup of G. 
> 
> Commutators are used to define nilpotent and solvable groups 
> and the largest abelian quotient group.
>
> The definition of the commutator above is used throughout this article, 
> but many other group theorists define the commutator as
> 
> [g, h] = ghg−1h−1.
> 
> Commutator identities are an important tool in group theory. 
> The expression ax denotes the conjugate of a by x, defined as x−1ax.
>      x^{y}=x[x,y].}
>      [y,x]=[x,y]^{-1}.}
>      [x,zy]=[x,y]⋅ [x,z]^{y}}
>  and 
>      [xz,y]=[x,y]^{z}⋅ [z,y].}
>      [x,y^{-1}]=[y,x]^{y^{-1}}}
>  and 
>      [x^{-1},y]=[y,x]^{x^{-1}}.}
>
>      [[x,y^{-1}],z]^{y}⋅ [[y,z^{-1}],x]^{z}⋅ [[z,x^{-1}],y]^{x}=1}
>
>  and 
>
>      [[x,y],z^{x}]⋅ [[z,x],y^{z}]⋅ [[y,z],x^{y}]=1.}
>
> Identity (5) is also known as the Hall–Witt identity, after Philip Hall and Ernst Witt.  
> It is a group-theoretic analogue of the Jacobi identity 
> for the ring-theoretic commutator (see next section).
>
> N.B., the above definition of the conjugate of a by x is used by some group theorists.  Many other group theorists define the conjugate of a by x as xax−1.  This is often written 
>
>      {}^{x}a}
>.  Similar identities hold for these conventions.
>
> Many identities that are true modulo certain subgroups are also used.  
> These can be particularly useful in the study of solvable groups and nilpotent groups.  For instance, in any group, second powers behave well:
>     (xy)^{2}=x^{2}y^{2}[y,x][[y,x],y].}
>
> If the derived subgroup is central, then
>
>      (xy)^{n}=x^{n}y^{n}[y,x]^{\binom {n}{2}}.}
>
> Rings often do not support division. Thus, the commutator of two elements a and b of a ring (or any associative algebra) is defined differently by
>
>      [a,b]=ab-ba.}
> The commutator is zero if and only if a and b commute. In linear algebra, if two endomorphisms of a space are represented by commuting matrices in terms of one basis, then they are so represented in terms of every basis. By using the commutator as a Lie bracket, every associative algebra can be turned into a Lie algebra.
> ## Anticommutator
> The [[anticommutator]] of two elements a and b of a ring or associative algebra is defined by
>
>      \{a,b\}=ab+ba.}
>
> Sometimes 
>
>      [a,b]_{+}}
>
>  is used to denote anticommutator, while 
>
>      [a,b]_{-}}   is then used for commutator. 
>  The anticommutator is used less often, but can be used to define Clifford algebras and Jordan algebras and in the derivation of the Dirac equation in particle physics.
>
> The commutator of two operators acting on a Hilbert space is a central concept in quantum mechanics, since it quantifies how well the two observables described by these operators can be measured simultaneously. The uncertainty principle is ultimately a theorem about such commutators, by virtue of the Robertson–Schrödinger relation. In phase space, equivalent commutators of function star-products are called Moyal brackets and are completely isomorphic to the Hilbert space commutator structures mentioned.
>
> 
>
> The commutator has the following properties:
>      [A+B,C]=[A,C]+[B,C]}
>
>      [A,A]=0}
>
>      [A,B]=-[B,A]}
>
>      [A,[B,C]]+[B,[C,A]]+[C,[A,B]]=0}
>
> Relation (3) is called anticommutativity, while (4) is the Jacobi identity.
>
>      [A,BC]=[A,B]C+B[A,C]}
>
>      [A,BCD]=[A,B]CD+B[A,C]D+BC[A,D]}
>      [A,BCDE]=[A,B]CDE+B[A,C]DE+BC[A,D]E+BCD[A,E]}
>
>
>      [AB,C]=A[B,C]+[A,C]B}
>
>      [ABC,D]=AB[C,D]+A[B,D]C+[A,D]BC}
>
>      [ABCD,E]=ABC[D,E]+AB[C,E]D+A[B,E]CD+[A,E]BCD}
>      [A,B+C]=[A,B]+[A,C]}
>
>
>      [A+B,C+D]=[A,C]+[A,D]+[B,C]+[B,D]}
>
>
>      [AB,CD]=A[B,C]D+[A,C]BD+CA[B,D]+C[A,D]B=A[B,C]D+AC[B,D]+[A,C]DB+C[A,D]B}
>
>      [[A,C],[B,D]]=[[[A,B],C],D]+[[[B,C],D],A]+[[[C,D],A],B]+[[[D,A],B],C]}
>
> If A is a fixed element of a ring R, identity (1) can be interpreted as a Leibniz rule for the map 
>
>       ad_A:R→ R
>
>  given by 
>
>       ad_A(B)=[A,B]
>       
> In other words, the map ad_A defines a derivation on the ring R.  
> Identities (2), (3) represent Leibniz rules for more than two factors, 
> and are valid for any derivation.  Identities (4)–(6) can also be interpreted as Leibniz rules. Identities (7), (8) express Z-bilinearity.
>
> From identity (9), one finds that the commutator of integer powers of ring elements is:
>      [A^{N},B^{M}]=∑ _{n=0}^{N-1}∑ _{m=0}^{M-1}A^{n}B^{m}[A,B]B^{N-n-1}A^{M-m-1}=∑ _{n=0}^{N-1}∑ _{m=0}^{M-1}B^{n}A^{m}[A,B]A^{N-n-1}B^{M-m-1}}
>
> Some of the above identities can be extended to the anticommutator using the above ± subscript notation.
>
> For example:
>
>
>      [AB,C]_{± }=A[B,C]_{-}+[A,C]_{± }B}
>
>      [AB,CD]_{± }=A[B,C]_{-}D+AC[B,D]_{-}+[A,C]_{-}DB+C[A,D]_{± }B}
>

>      [[A,B],[C,D]]=[[[B,C]_{+},A]_{+},D]-[[[B,D]_{+},A]_{+},C]+[[[A,D]_{+},B]_{+},C]-[[[A,C]_{+},B]_{+},D]}
>      [A,[B,C]_{± }]+[B,[C,A]_{± }]+[C,[A,B]_{± }]=0}
>
>      [A,BC]_{± }=[A,B]_{-}C+B[A,C]_{± }=[A,B]_{± }C∓ B[A,C]_{-}}
>
>      [A,BC]=[A,B]_{± }C∓ B[A,C]_{± }}
>      
> Consider a ring or algebra in which the exponential 
>
>      e^{A}=\exp(A)=1+A+{\tfrac {1}{2!}}A^{2}+⋯ }
>
>  can be meaningfully defined, such as a Banach algebra or a ring of formal power series.
>
> In such a ring, Hadamard's lemma applied to nested commutators gives: 
>
>     {\textstyle e^{A}Be^{-A}\ =\ B+[A,B]+{\frac {1}{2!}}[A,[A,B]]+{\frac {1}{3!}}[A,[A,[A,B]]]+⋯ \ =\ e^{ {ad} _{A}}(B).}
>
>  (For the last expression, see Adjoint derivation below.) This formula underlies the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff expansion of log(exp(A) exp(B)).
>
> A similar expansion expresses the group commutator of expressions 
>
>      e^{A}}
>
>
>  (analogous to elements of a Lie group) in terms of a series of nested commutators (Lie brackets),
>
>      e^{A}e^{B}e^{-A}e^{-B}=\exp \!([A,B]+{\frac {1}{2!}}[A{+}B,[A,B]]+{\frac {1}{3!}}({\frac {1}{2}}[A,[B,[B,A]]]+[A{+}B,[A{+}B,[A,B]]])+⋯ ).}
>
> When dealing with graded algebras, the commutator is usually replaced by the graded commutator, defined in homogeneous components as 
>
>      [ω ,η ]_{gr}:=ω η -(-1)^{\deg ω \deg η }η ω .}
>
> Especially if one deals with multiple commutators in a ring R, another notation turns out to be useful. For an element 
>
>      x∈ R}
>
> , we define the adjoint mapping 
>       {ad} _{x}:R→ R}
>
>   
>
>  by:
>
>
>       {ad} _{x}(y)=[x,y]=xy-yx.}
> This mapping is a derivation on the ring R: 
>
>       {ad} _{x}\!(yz)\ =\  {ad} _{x}\!(y)\,z\,+\,y\, {ad} _{x}\!(z).}
>
> By the Jacobi identity, it is also a derivation over the commutation operation: 
>
>       {ad} _{x}[y,z]\ =\ [ {ad} _{x}\!(y),z]\,+\,[y, {ad} _{x}\!(z)].}
>
> Composing such mappings, we get for example 
>
>
>       {ad} _{x} {ad} _{y}(z)=[x,[y,z]\,]}
>
>  and 
>
>
>       {ad} _{x}^{2}\!(z)\ =\  {ad} _{x}\!( {ad} _{x}\!(z))\ =\ [x,[x,z]\,].}
>
>   
>
>  We may consider 
>
>       {ad} }
>
>  itself as a mapping, 

>       {ad} :R→  {End} (R)}
>
> , where 
>       {End} (R)}
>  is the ring of mappings from R to itself with composition as the multiplication operation. Then 
>       {ad} }
>  is a Lie algebra homomorphism, preserving the commutator:
>
>       {ad} _{[x,y]}=[ {ad} _{x}, {ad} _{y}].}
>
> By contrast, it is not always a ring homomorphism: usually 
>       {ad} _{xy}\,\neq \, {ad} _{x} {ad} _{y}}
>
> The general Leibniz rule, expanding repeated derivatives of a product, can be written abstractly using the adjoint representation:
>
>      x^{n}y=∑ _{k=0}^{n}{\binom {n}{k}} {ad} _{x}^{k}\!(y)\,x^{n-k}.}
>
> Replacing _x_  by the differentiation operator ∂ 
>
> , and _y_   by the multiplication operator _mf_ 
>      m_{f}:g↦ fg}
>
> , we get 
>
>
>       {ad} (∂ )(m_{f})=m_{∂ (f)}}
>
> , and applying both sides to a function g, the identity becomes the usual Leibniz rule for the nth derivative 
>
>      ∂ ^{n}\!(fg)}
>
> Anticommutativity
>
> Associator
>
> Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula
>
> Canonical commutation relation
>
> Centralizer a.k.a. commutant
>
> Derivation (abstract algebra)
>
> Moyal bracket
>
> Pincherle derivative
>
> Poisson bracket
>
> Ternary commutator
>
> Three subgroups lemma
>
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commutator)


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator](/_Standards/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator.public](/_public/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator.internal](/_internal/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator.protect](/_protect/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator.private](/_private/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator.personal](/_personal/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Commutator.secret](/_secret/Mathematics/Algebra/Commutator.secret.md)

