---
aliases:
- 2017 Unite the Right rally
- 2017年のユナイト・ザ・ライト・ラリー
- 2017年团结右翼集会
- Biểu tình Charlottesville 2017
- Manifestacio Unuigu la Dekstron
- Manifestació Unite the Right
- Manifestación Unite the Right
- Manifestadeg Unite the Right 2017
- Manifestasiòṅ Unìr la Dèstra dal 2017
- Manifestation Uni le Dextra
- Manifestation Unite the Right de 2017
- Manifestação Unite the Right de 2017
- Manifestația Unite the Right
- Pawai Unite the Right
- Perhimpunan Unite the Right
- Rechtsextreme Demonstrationen und Terroranschlag in Charlottesville 2017
- Unite the Right
- Unite the Right rally
- Unite_the_Right_rally
- Марш «Об'єднаних правих»
- марш «Объединим правых» в Шарлотсвилле
- марш „Яднайма правых“
- עצרת איחוד הימין האמריקאי, 2017
- احتجاجات شارلوتسفيل 2017
- گردهمایی اتحاد راستگرایان ۲۰۱۷
- ২০১৭ ইউনাইট দ্য রাইট সমাবেশ
- 유나이트 더 라이트 랠리
has_id_wikidata: Q36248530
dv_has_:
  name_:
    ar: احتجاجات شارلوتسفيل 2017
    be_tarask: марш „Яднайма правых“
    bn: ২০১৭ ইউনাইট দ্য রাইট সমাবেশ
    br: Manifestadeg Unite the Right 2017
    ca: Manifestació Unite the Right
    de: Rechtsextreme Demonstrationen und Terroranschlag in Charlottesville 2017
    eml: Manifestasiòṅ Unìr la Dèstra dal 2017
    en: Unite the Right rally
    en_ca: 2017 Unite the Right rally
    en_gb: Unite the Right rally
    eo: Manifestacio Unuigu la Dekstron
    es: Manifestación Unite the Right
    fa: گردهمایی اتحاد راستگرایان ۲۰۱۷
    fi: Unite the Right Rally
    fr: Manifestation Unite the Right de 2017
    he: עצרת איחוד הימין האמריקאי, 2017
    ia: Manifestation Uni le Dextra
    id: Pawai Unite the Right
    it: Unite the Right rally
    ja: 2017年のユナイト・ザ・ライト・ラリー
    ko: 유나이트 더 라이트 랠리
    ms: Perhimpunan Unite the Right
    nb: Unite the Right rally
    nl: Unite the Right rally
    pl: Unite the Right
    pt: Manifestação Unite the Right de 2017
    ro: Manifestația Unite the Right
    ru: марш «Объединим правых» в Шарлотсвилле
    sn: Unite the Right rally
    sv: Unite the Right Rally
    uk: Марш «Об'єднаних правих»
    vi: Biểu tình Charlottesville 2017
    zh: 2017年团结右翼集会
---
# [[Unite_the_Right_rally]]  

#has_/time_/started :: 2017-08-11 
#has_/time_/stopped  :: 2017-08-12 


## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> The **Unite the Right rally** was a white supremacist rally 
> that took place in Charlottesville, Virginia, from August 11 to 12, 2017. 
> 
> Marchers included members of the alt-right, neo-Confederates, 
> neo-fascists, white nationalists, neo-Nazis, Klansmen, and far-right militias. 
> 
> Some groups chanted racist and antisemitic slogans and carried weapons, 
> Nazi and neo-Nazi symbols, the Valknut, Confederate battle flags, Deus vult crosses, flags, 
> and other symbols of various past and present antisemitic and anti-Islamic groups. 
> 
> The organizers' stated goals included 
> - the unification of the American white nationalist movement and 
> - opposing the proposed removal of the statue of General Robert E. Lee 
>   from Charlottesville's former Lee Park. 
> 
> The rally sparked a national debate over Confederate iconography, racial violence, 
> and white supremacy. The event had hundreds of participants. 
>
> The rally occurred amid the controversy which was 
> generated by the removal of Confederate monuments by local governments 
> following the Charleston church shooting in 2015, 
> in which Dylann Roof, a white supremacist, shot and killed nine members of a black church, 
> including the minister (a state senator), and wounded another member of the church. 
> 
> The rally turned violent after protesters clashed with counter-protesters, 
> resulting in more than 30 injured. 
> 
> On the morning of August 12, Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe declared a state of emergency, 
> stating that public safety could not be safeguarded without additional powers. 
> Within an hour, at 11:22 a.m., 
> the Virginia State Police declared the rally to be an unlawful assembly. 
> 
> At around 1:45 p.m., self-identified white supremacist James Alex Fields Jr. 
> deliberately rammed his car into a crowd of counter-protesters 
> about 1⁄2 mile (800 m) away from the rally site, killing Heather Heyer and injuring 35 people. 
> 
> Fields fled the scene in his car but was arrested soon afterward. 
> He was tried and convicted in Virginia state court of first-degree murder, malicious wounding, 
> and other crimes in 2018, with the jury recommending 
> a sentence of life imprisonment plus 419 years. 
> The following year, Fields pleaded guilty to 29 federal hate crimes in a plea agreement 
> to avoid the death penalty in this trial.
>
> US President Donald Trump's remarks about the rally generated negative responses. 
> In his initial statement following the rally, 
> Trump condemned the "display of hatred, bigotry, and violence on many sides." 
> This first statement and his subsequent defenses of it, 
> in which he also referred to "very fine people on both sides", 
> were criticized as implying a moral equivalence 
> between the white supremacist protesters and the counter-protesters. 
> Trump later stated (in the same statement) 
> that "I'm not talking about the neo-Nazis and the white nationalists, 
> because they should be condemned totally–
> but you had many people in that group other than neo-Nazis and white nationalists".
>
> The rally and resulting death and injuries 
> resulted in a backlash against white supremacist groups in the United States. 
> 
> A number of groups that participated in the rally had events canceled by universities, 
> and their financial and social media accounts closed by major companies. 
> 
> Some Twitter users led a campaign to identify 
> and publicly shame marchers at the rally from photographs; 
> at least one rally attendee was dismissed from his job as a result of the campaign. 
> 
> While the organizers intended for the rally to unite far-right groups 
> with the goal of playing a larger role in American politics, 
> the backlash and resultant infighting between alt-right leaders 
> has been credited with causing a decline in the movement.
>
> After Charlottesville refused to approve another march, 
> Unite the Right held an anniversary rally on August 11–12, 2018, 
> called "Unite the Right 2", in Washington, D.C. 
> 
> The rally drew only 20–30 protesters amidst thousands of counter-protesters, 
> including religious organizations, civil rights groups, and anti-fascist organizers.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unite%20the%20Right%20rally) 


## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> The **Unite the Right** (French: Unir la Droite) movement 
> was a Canadian political movement which existed from around the mid-1990s to 2003. 
> The movement came into being when it became clear that 
> neither of Canada's two main right-of-centre political parties, 
> - the Reform Party of Canada/Canadian Alliance (CA) and 
> - the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada (PC), 
> was independently capable of defeating the governing Liberal Party. 
> 
> The objective of the movement, therefore, was to merge the two parties into a single party 
> (or, if this was not possible, to find a power-sharing arrangement between the two parties). 
> The goal of uniting the right was accomplished in December 2003 
> with the formation of the Conservative Party of Canada.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unite%20the%20Right%20(Canada)) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_Standards/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally|Unite_the_Right_rally]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_public/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally.public|Unite_the_Right_rally.public]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_internal/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally.internal|Unite_the_Right_rally.internal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_protect/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally.protect|Unite_the_Right_rally.protect]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_private/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally.private|Unite_the_Right_rally.private]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_personal/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally.personal|Unite_the_Right_rally.personal]] 

### #is_/same_as :: [[/_secret/Society/Ideology/Political_Ideology/Fascism/Unite_the_Right_rally.secret|Unite_the_Right_rally.secret]] 

