---
title: Dipsacales
---

-   « Ancestral Groups 
    -   [Asterids](Asterids.md)
    -   [Core Eudicots](Core_Eudicots)
    -   [eudicots](Eukaryotes/Green_plants/Embryophytes/Spermatopsida/Angiosperms/eudicots.md)
    -   [Angiosperms](Angiosperms.md)
    -   [Spermatopsida](Spermatopsida.md)
    -   [Embryophytes](Embryophytes.md)
    -   [Green plants](Green_plants)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../../../../../../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Asterids
    -   [Cornales](Cornales.md)
    -   [Ericales](Ericales.md)
    -   [Solanales](Solanales.md)
    -   [Lamiales](Lamiales.md)
    -   [Gentianales](Gentianales.md)
    -   [Garryales](Garryales.md)
    -   [Asterales](Asterales.md)
    -   [Apiales](Apiales.md)
    -   Dipsacales
    -   [Aquifoliales](Aquifoliales.md)

-   » Sub-Groups
    -   [Adoxaceae](Adoxaceae.md)
    -   [Morinaceae](Morinaceae.md)
    -   [Valerianaceae](Valerianaceae.md)

# Dipsacales 

[Charles D. Bell](#AboutThisPage)

![](Dipsacus_fullonum0047.jpg)
![](Lonicera_maackii0142.jpg)
![ ](nardos1_002.jpg)

Containing group: [Asterids](Asterids.md)

### Introduction

Dipsacales, with over 1000 species, form a branch within the Asteridae
related to the Asterales, Apiales, and several smaller lineages (Bremer
et al. 2002).

Knowledge of phylogenetic relationships within Dipsacales has improved
dramatically over the last two decades, but especially so within the
last few years. Analyses have been based on morphological characters, as
well as various molecular datasets, analyzed both separately and in
various combinations (Donoghue 1983a; Donoghue et al. 1992; Judd et al.
1994; Backlund and Donoghue 1996; Backlund and Bremer 1997; Kim et al.
1999; Pyck et al. 1999; Pyck and Smets 2000; Pyck 2001; Donoghue et al.
2001; Bell et al. 2001; Pyck et al. 2002; Zhang et al. 2002; Bell and
Donoghue 2003).

Overall, these studies show remarkable congruence with respect to the
major lineages identified and their relationships to one another.
Recently, phylogenetic names have been applied to these major clades
(Donoghue et al. 2001; Fig. 1A). The basal split separates Adoxaceae
(including *Viburnum*, *Sambucus*, and Adoxina, which contains *Adoxa*
and its relatives) from Caprifoliaceae (including Diervilleae,
Caprifolieae, Linnaeeae, Morinaceae, Valerianaceae, and Dipsacaceae).
Within Adoxaceae, *Viburnum* is sister to Adoxoideae, which includes
*Sambucus* and the Adoxina clade. Within Caprifoliaceae, Donoghue et al.
(2001) provided phylogenetic definitions for the names of two major
clades (de Queiroz and Gauthier 1994; Cantino and de Queiroz 2000). The
Linnina clade includes Linnaeeae and the Valerina clade, which contains
the herbaceous groups Morinaceae, Valerianaceae, and Dipsacaceae.
*Triplostegia* now appears to be more closely related to Dipsacaceae
than it is to Valerianaceae (in agreement with Thorne 1983; Peng et al.
1995, but contra Cronquist 1981; Backlund and Donoghue 1996; Backlund
and Nilsson 1997; Pyck 2001).

### Fossil Record & Molecular Dating

Although the fossil record is not rich for Dipsacales, a number of
fossils have been well documented (Muller, 1981; Manchester and
Donoghue, 1995; Backlund, 1996). In the Adoxaceae, *Sambucus* has been
reported based on endocarps from the late Eocene to Pliocene of Europe
(Reid and Chandler, 1926). Fruits of *Dipelta*, which are surrounded by
distinctive papery bracts, have been described from the late
Eocene/early Oligocene (Reid and Chandler, 1926), and those of
*Heptacodium* have been identified from the late Miocene (11.2-5.3 mya)
of Japan (Ozaki, 1980). *Diplodipelta* (Manchester and Donoghue, 1995),
from the late Eocene Florissant flora of Colorado (36-35 mya) and
several Oligocene sites in western North America, appears to be the
sister group of modern *Dipelta*; both are characterized by enlarged
supernumerary bracts that form a wind-dispersed unit. The distinctive
winged seeds of *Weigela* have been reported from the Miocene and
Pliocene of Poland (Lancucka-Srodoniowa, 1967), the Oligocene and
Miocene of Siberia (Dorofeev, 1963), as well as from the Miocene of
eastern Asia (Nikitin, 1976). In Valerianaceae, the unusual fruits
(\"wing\" on the ovary) of *Patrinia* have been documented from the
Miocene to Pliocene of Poland and Russia (Lancucka-Srodoniowa, 1967), as
well as from the late Miocene of Japan (Ozaki, 1980). Likewise,
*Valeriana* is known on the basis of fossil fruits from the late Miocene
and Pliocene in Europe. Fossils of other Dipsacales have been reported,
but are now known to be incorrectly assigned or are considered too
unreliable. These include *Abelia* (Manchester and Habley, 1997) and
many specimens attributed to *Viburnum* and *Lonicera*.

![ ](Diplodipelta_miocenica_UF_w.jpg)

*Diplodipelta* from the late Eocene Florissant flora of Colorado.
Photograph copyright © Steven Manchester.

Several attempts have been made to estimate the age of Dipsacales.
Backlund\'s (1996) study used a linear regression method with *rbcL*
sequence data and several fossil calibration points, and estimated that
Dipsacales originated around 70-60 million years ago (mya), during the
late Cretaceous or Early Tertiary. This study assumed a molecular clock
for the rbcL data and used the midpoint of major geological time periods
for fossil calibrations. In an analysis of 560 species based on a
three-gene phylogeny (Soltis et al., 1999; 2000), Wikstrom et al. (2001)
used nonparametric rate smoothing (NPRS) to estimate divergence times
across angiosperms. They estimated an age for Dipsacales of 81-78 my.
Since the purpose of the Wikstrom et al. analysis was to estimate the
age of angiosperms as a whole, and of major lineages within angiosperms,
the sampling of Dipsacales was poor. The accuracy of the age estimates
from both of these analyses may also suffer from the fact that they used
the \"wrong\" topology for Dipsacales based on our current knowledge.

Bell and Donoghue (2005) used recently proposed methods that relax the
assumption of rate constancy among lineages (local clocks, nonparametric
rate smoothing, penalized likelihood, and Bayesian relaxed clock) to
estimate the ages of Dipsacales. Age estimates for Dipsacales varied
widely among markers and codon positions, and depended on the fossils
used for calibration and method of analysis. Some methods yielded dates
for the Dipsacales diversification that appear to be too old (prior to
the presumed 125 my \[million years\] age of eudicots), and others
suggested ages that are too young based on well-documented Dipsacales
fossils. Concordant penalized likelihood and Bayesian studies imply that
Dipsacales originated in the Cretaceous, as did its two major lineages,
Adoxaceae and Caprifoliaceae. However, diversification of crown
Adoxaceae and Caprifoliaceae mainly occurred in the Tertiary, with the
origin of major lineages within these clades mainly occurring during the
Eocene. Another round of diversification appears to have occurred in the
Miocene. Several radiations, such as Valerianaceae in South America and
Dipsacaceae around the Mediterranean, are even more recent. This study
demonstrates the wide range of divergence times that can be obtained
using different methods and data sets, and cautions against reliance on
age estimates based on only a single gene or methodology. Despite this
variance, significant conclusions can be made about the timing of
Dipsacales evolution (see, Bell and Donoghue, 2005 for more discussion).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

All phylogenetic analyses have shown that Caprifoliaceae in the
traditional sense (consisting of *Viburnum*, *Sambucus*, Diervilleae,
Caprifolieae, and Linnaeeae) do not form a clade. In the phylogenetic
classification of Donoghue et al. (2001) the most significant change is
that the name Caprifoliaceae is applied to the clade including
Diervilleae, Caprifolieae, and Linnaeeae, as well as the Morinaceae,
Valerianaceae, and Dipsacaceae. In the interest of nomenclatural
stability these six names have been retained, since in their traditional
sense they refer to clades. The classification suggested by Backlund and
Pyck (1998; also Backlund and Bremer 1996; APG 1998; Stevens 2002) is
rejected because it requires a variety of name changes only for the sake
of adjusting ranks (Diervilleae, Caprifolieae, and Linnaeeae are renamed
Diervilleaceae, Caprifoliaceae, and Linnaeaceae, respectively), and
because it fails to provide names for several well supported clades
(e.g., the Linnina clade, which includes Linnaeeae, Morinaceae,
Valerianaceae, and Dipsacaceae). Similar criticisms apply to other
recently proposed classifications (Benko-Iseppon and Morawetz 2000).

Progress has also been made in elucidating phylogenetic relationships
within particular Dipsacales clades. Within Adoxaceae, analyses of
several datasets have been reported for *Viburnum*, including
morphological characters (Donoghue 1983b), cpDNA restriction sites
(Donoghue and Sytsma 1993), and sequences of the nuclear ribosomal
internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region (Donoghue and Baldwin 1993).
More recently, analyses have been conducted using the chloroplast locus
*matK* and the nuclear granule-bound starch synthase (*waxy*) genes
(Winkworth and Donoghue 2002, unpublished data). Sambucus has been
analyzed using ITS sequences (Eriksson and Donoghue 1998), and Adoxina
using morphology and sequences of *rbcL* and ITS (Liu et al. 2000;
Donoghue et al. 2001). Within Caprifoliaceae, Kim and Kim (1999)
analyzed Diervilleae (*Diervilla* and *Weigela*) using ITS sequences.
Triosteum has been studied using ITS and *waxy* sequences (Gould &
Donoghue 2000), and more recently using cpDNA *trnL* and *matK*
sequences (Cullis-Suzuki, Bell, Winkworth, and Donoghue, unpublished
data), and *Lonicera* is currently under study using ITS and matK (Li &
Donoghue 2002, unpublished data). Bell and Donoghue (2002, 2003) have
carried out analyses within Morinaceae and Valerianaceae based on
*trnL*, *matK*, and ITS. For Dipsacaceae, Caputo and Cozzolino (1994)
analyzed morphological characters, Mayer and Ehrendorfer (1999, 2000)
presented phylogenetic hypothesis for *Scabiosa* and *Pterocephalus* and
their relatives, and studies are underway using trnL, matK, ITS (Bell
and Donoghue, unpublished data) In all, nearly 300 species have now been
included in one or another phylogenetic analysis.

To date the single most convincing phylogenetic study of the Dipsacales,
both in terms of character number (7593 nucleotide sites) and confident
resolution, is that of Bell et al. (2001). However, this study was based
entirely on chloroplast DNA sequences, which leaves open the possibility
of incongruence with other data sources. Although it is comforting that
cpDNA and morphological analyses have yielded very similar results, the
addition of data from nuclear genes would be highly desirable.

### References

Albach, D. C., P. S. Soltis, D. E. Soltis, and R. G. Olmstead. 2001.
Phylogenetic analysis of asterids based on sequences of four genes.
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 88:163-212.

Backlund, A. A. & Bremer, K. 1997. Phylogeny of the Asteridae s. str.
based on rbcL sequences, with particular reference to the Dipsacales.
Plant Systematics and Evolution 207:225-254.

Backlund, A. A. & Bremer, K. 1998. To be or not to be- principles of
classification and monotypic plant families. Taxon 47:391-400.

Backlund, A. A. & Donoghue, M. J. 1996. Morphology and phylogeny of the
order Dipsacales. In Phylogeny of the Dipsacales, A. A. Backlund,
Doctoral Dissertation. Uppsala: Department of Systematic Botany, Uppsala
Univ.

Backlund A. A. & Pyck, N. 1998. Diervillaceae and Linnaeaceae, two new
families of caprifolioids. Taxon 47:657-661.

Bell, C. D. and M. J. Donoghue. 2003. Phylogeny and biogeography of
Morinaceae (Dipsacales) based on nuclear and chloroplast DNA sequences.
Organisms, Diversity, and Evolution.

Bell, C. D., Edwards, E. J., Kim, S.-T. & Donoghue, M. J. (2001):
Dipsacales phylogeny based on chloroplast DNA sequences. Harvard Papers
in Botany 6:481-499.

Blackmore, S. & Cannon, M. J. (1983): Palynology and systematics of
Morinaceae. Rev. Palaeobot. and Palyn.40:207-226.

Bremer, K., A. Backlund, B. Sennblad, U. Swenson, K. Andreasen, M.
Hjertson, J. Lundberg, M. Backlund, and B. Bremer. 2001. A phylogenetic
analysis of 100+ genera and 50+ families of euasterids based on
morphological and molecular data with notes on possible higher level
morphological synapomorphies. Plant Systematics and Evolution
229:137-169.

Bremer, B., K. Bremer, N. Heidari, P. Erixon, R. G. Olmstead, A. A.
Anderberg, M. K?llersj?, and E. Barkhordarian. 2002. Phylogenetics of
asterids based on 3 coding and 3 non-coding chloroplast DNA markers and
the utility of non-coding DNA at higher taxonomic levels. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 24:274-301.

Cannon, M. J. & Cannon, J. F. M. (1984): A revision of the Morinaceae
(Magnoliophyta-Dipsacales). Bull. Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.) Bot. 12:1-35.

Caputo, P. & Cozzolino, S. (1994): A cladistic analysis of Dipsacaceae
(Dipsacales). Pl. Syst. Evol. 189:41-61.

Cronquist, A. (1988): The Evolution and Classification of Flowering
Plants. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York.

Donoghue, M. J., T. Eriksson, P. A. Reeves, and R. G. Olmstead. 2001.
Phylogeny and phylogenetic taxonomy of Dipsacales, with special
reference to Sinadoxa and Tetradoxa (Adoxaceae). Harvard Papers in
Botany 6:459-479.

Donoghue, M. J., R. G. Olmstead, J. F. Smith, and J. D. Palmer. 1992.
Phylogenetic relationships of Dipsacales based on rbcL sequences. Annals
of the Missouri Botanical Garden 79:333-345.

Donoghue, M. J., Bell, C. D., & Winkworth, R. C. (in press): The
evolution of reproductive characters in Dipsacales. Int. J. Plant Sci.

Hofman, U. & Gottmann, J. (1990): Morina L. und Triplostegia Wall. Ex
DC. Im vergleich mit Valerianaceae und Dipsacaceae. Bot. Jahrb. Syst.
111:499-553.

Judd, W. S., Sanders, R. W. & Donoghue, M. J. (1994): Angiosperm family
pairs preliminary phylogenetiic analyses. Harvard Pap. in Bot. 5:1-51.

Manchester, S. R. & Donoghue, M. J. (1995): Winged fruits of Linnaeeae
(Caprifoliaceae) in the Tertiary of western North America: Diplodipelta
gen. nov. International Journal of Plant Sciences 156:709-722.

Olmstead, R. G., K.-J. Kim, R. K. Jansen, and S. J. Wagstaff. 2000. The
phylogeny of the Asteridae sensu lato based on chloroplast ndhF gene
sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 16:96-112.

Peng, C.-I., Tobe, H. & Takahashi, M. (1995): Reproductive morphology
and relationships of Triplostegia (Dipsacales). Bot. Jahrb. Syst.
116:505-516.

Pyck, N., Roels, P. & Smets, E. (1999): Tribal relationships in
Caprifoliaceae: evidence from a cladistic analysis using ndhF sequences.
Syst. Geogr. Pl. 69:145-159.

Pyck, N. & Smets, E. (2000): A search for the position of the seven-son
flower (Heptacodium, Dipsacales): combining molecular and morphological
evidence. Pl. Syst. Evol. 225:185-199.

Pyck, N., Van Lysebetten, A., Stessens, J. & Smets, E. (2002): The
phylogeny of Patrinieae sensu Grabner (Valerianaceae) revisited:
additional evidence from ndhF sequence data. Pl. Syst. Evol. 233:29-46.

Roels, P. & Smets, E. (1996): A floral ontogenetic study in Dipsacales.
Int. J. Plant Sci. 157:203-218.

Savolainen, V., M. F. Fay, D. C. Albach, A. Backlund, M. van der Bank,
K. M. Cameron, S. A. Johnson, M. D. Lled?, J.-C. Pintaud, M. Powell, M.
C. Sheahan, D. E. Soltis, P. S. Soltis, P. Weston, W. M. Whitten, K. J.
Wurdack, and M. W. Chase. 2000. Phylogeny of the eudicots: a nearly
complete familial analysis based on rbcl gene sequences. Kew Bulletin
55:257-309.

Zhang, W-H., Chen, Z-D., Li, J-H., Chen, H-B. & Tang, Y-C. (2003):
Phylogeny of the Dipsacales s.l. based on chloroplast trnL-F and ndhF
sequences. Mol. Phylo. Evol. 26:176-189.

##### Title Illustrations

![Fuller\'s teasel, Dipsacus fullonum](Dipsacus_fullonum0047_002.jpg)

  --------------------------
  Scientific Name ::    Dipsacus fullonum
  Location ::          Mt. Shasta (Siskiyou County, California, USA)
  Comments            Fuller\'s teasel (Dipsacaceae)
  Source Collection   [CalPhotos](http://calphotos.berkeley.edu/)
  Copyright ::           © 2002 [Molly Elizabeth Bagley](mailto:illustrations@snowcrest.net)
  --------------------------
![Amur honeysuckle, Lonicera maackii](Lonicera_maackii0142_002.jpg)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::    Lonicera maackii
  Location ::          Kedrovaja Pad Natural Reserve, Khasansky distr., Primorsky Territory (Russian Federation)
  Comments            Amur honeysuckle (Caprifoliaceae)
  Source Collection   [CalPhotos](http://calphotos.berkeley.edu/)
  Copyright ::           © 1999 [Nick Kurzenko](mailto:kurzenko@ibss.dvo.ru) 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
![](nardos1.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::     Nardostachys jatamansi
  Specimen Condition   Live Specimen
  Identified By        C. Bell
  Copyright ::            © [Michael Donoghue](mailto:michael.donoghue@yale.edu) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------