---
title: Glomeromycota
---

## Phylogeny 


-   « Ancestral Groups  
    -   [Fungi](Fungi)
    -   [Eukaryotes](Eukaryotes)
    -   [Tree of Life](../../Tree_of_Life.md)

-   ◊ Sibling Groups of  Fungi
    -   [Basidiomycota](Basidiomycota)
    -   [Ascomycota](Ascomycota)
    -   Glomeromycota
    -   [Chytridiomycota](Chytridiomycota)
    -   [Zygomycota](Zygomycota)

-   » Sub-Groups 

# Glomeromycota

## Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and their relative(s) 

[Dirk Redecker](http://www.tolweb.org/)

![ ](s328_small_002.jpg)
![ ](arbuscule_002.jpg)
![](lclr_myc_002.jpg)

Phylogenetic tree based on analyses of ribosomal small subunit
sequences. *Glomus* subgroups as defined by Schwarzott et al. (2001)

Containing group: [Fungi](Eukaryotes/Fungi.md)

### Information on the Internet

-   [International Culture Collection of (Vesicular) Arbuscular     Mycorrhizal Fungi (INVAM)](http://invam.caf.wvu.edu/index.html)
-   [International Bank for the Glomeromycota     (BEG)](http://www.kent.ac.uk/bio/beg/)
-   [Mycorrhiza Information Exchange](http://mycorrhiza.ag.utk.edu/)
-   [AMF phylogeny website](http://www.amf-phylogeny.com/)
-   [Janusz Blaszkowki\'s     website](http://www.agro.ar.szczecin.pl/%7Ejblaszkowski/)
-   [5th International Conference on Mycorrhizas (Granada, Spain,     2006)](http://www.eez.csic.es/icom5/)

### Introduction

Although the Glomeromycota comprise a group of fungi virtually unknown
to the broad public, they are essential for terrestrial ecosystem
function. Members of this group are mutualistic symbionts that form
arbuscular mycorrhizal (**AM**) associations intracellularly within the
roots of the vast majority of herbaceous plants and tropical trees. This
type of symbiosis is termed mutualistic because the fungus and host
plant both benefit from this intimate association. The fungal symbiont
receives carbohydrates from the plant in exchange for functioning as an
extended root system, thereby dramatically improving mineral uptake by
the plant roots. Although there are various types of mycorrhizas,
involving different fungal and plant symbionts, the arbuscular
mycorrhiza type is the most widespread.

The phylum Glomeromycota currently comprises approximately 150 described
species distributed among ten genera, most of which are defined
primarily by spore morphology. Recently, DNA sequences have also been
used to circumscribe taxa.

### Characteristics

-   obligate symbionts
-   formation of arbuscules in plant roots
-   large, multinucleate spores with layered walls
-   non-septate hyphae

As mutualistic symbionts, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are able to grow
within plant roots without causing disease symptoms. They are obligate
symbionts because no one has been successful in growing glomeromycotan
fungi separately from their symbiotic plant host. Once they invade the
root, they usually form tree-shaped structures called arbuscules that
often fill the root cells. Because the cell walls of both symbionts are
greatly reduced in thickness along the surface of the arbuscule
branches, both symbiotic partners are brought into very close contact.
This highly specialized symbiosis was previously known as
\"vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhiza\" (VAM) because some glomeromycotan
fungi also form storage organs termed vesicles within the root cells.

Glomeromycotan fungi produce relatively large (40-800 µm) spores with
layered walls, containing several hundreds to thousands of nuclei
(Bécard and Pfeffer, 1993). Spores may be formed singly, in clusters or
in morphologically distinct \"fruitbodies\" called sporocarps (Morton,
1988). Similar to most Zygomycota, the cellular filaments (hyphae) of
glomeromycotan fungi lack regular cross walls (septae) that are one of
the hallmarks of the fungal phyla Basidiomycota and Ascomycota.

### Reproduction and Life Cycle

There is no evidence that the Glomeromycota reproduce sexually. Studies
using molecular marker genes have detected no genetic recombination or
only low levels (Kuhn et al., 2001). Therefore it is generally assumed
that the spores are formed asexually. There are conflicting reports on
the question whether the nuclei in the mycelium and spores of one
organism are genetically identical or not (Kuhn et al., 2001, Pawlowska
and Taylor, 2004; Hijri and Sanders, 2005). The presence of multiple,
slightly differing variants of the nuclear-encoded ribosomal RNA genes
in single spores may or may not be due to this possible nuclear
heterogeneity.

Under favorable conditions glomeromycotan spores germinate, form
appressoria on host roots and establish a new mycorrhizal symbiosis. New
spores may be formed on the mycelium either within or outside the root.
In addition to propagation by spores, many species of Glomeromycota can
colonize host plants from hyphal fragments in the soil or directly from
symbionts that inhabit the roots of a neighboring plant.

Given that they are obligate symbionts, if no host root is found by the
germinating hypha of a spore, growth ceases after some time, and the
cytoplasm may be retracted within the spore. Because they cannot be
cultured axenically, these fungi are propagated primarily on the host
plant in pot cultures grown in a greenhouse. The spores produced in open
pot cultures are not sterile and therefore harbor a wide variety of
bacteria and other fungi (Bianciotto et al., 2000; Hijri et al., 2002).
Cultures can be started using field soil containing spores or hyphae,
from a number of purified spores that morphologically appear to
represent a single species, or from a single spore. Glomeromycotan
spores can be concentrated by wet-sieving methods or by centrifugation
techniques. In addition to propagation via pot cultures, a number of
glomeromycotan species can be grown in root organ cultures, i.e. on the
roots of a plant growing on a sterile nutrient medium in a petri dish
(Fortin et al., 2002). The fungal biomass produced in root organ
cultures usually does not contain other microorganisms, and this is
therefore the method of choice for certain molecular biological
experiments.

![ ](scutellospora_sm.jpg)

Figure 1: Spores of *Scutellospora castanea* (isolate BEG1, photo ©
Annemarie Brennwald). Spore diameter approximately 220 µm.

### Ecology and Physiology

Associations between plant roots and fungi (mycorrhizas) are ubiquitous.
The great majority of land plants are host for some type of mycorrhiza.
Members of most plant families form AM (Smith and Read, 1997). Other
types of mycorrhiza are formed with fungi from the phyla Asco- or
Basidiomycota: ectomycorrhiza of trees and shrubs, ericoid mycorrhiza of
Ericales, orchid mycorrhiza, and some others. Only a few plant families
are regarded as non-mycorrhizal, among them the Brassicaceae (e.g.
cabbage, *Arabidopsis*), Caryophyllaceae (e.g. carnation) and
Chenopodiaceae (e.g. spinach).

As most crops are hosts for AM, this association is potentially an
important resource for agriculture (e. g. see Sieverding, 1991).
Positive effects of the arbuscular mycorrhiza on plant growth, nutrient
uptake and disease resistance have often been reported. These effects
are relatively easy to demonstrate in comparison to sterilized soil
which rarely is found under field conditions. Although the fungal
diversity in temperate agricultural soils was shown to be low compared
to natural field sites (Helgason et al., 1998), there is almost always
an indigenous fungal community the introduced AM fungi have to compete
with.

AM has been reported to improve the uptake of different mineral
nutrients. However, phosphate has been in the focus because it can be a
limiting factor for plant growth due to its immobility in the soil. The
fine hyphal network is superior to the relatively thick roots and root
hairs in accessing phosphate in the soil. On the other hand, high
available phosphate concentrations often seem to induce a limitiation of
fungal colonization levels by the plants.

Host specificity of AM appears to be be very low (Smith and Read, 1997)
because many species have been shown to colonize a wide range of host
plants in the greenhouse. Interestingly, plants are typically colonized
by a mixture of AM fungal species, often within the same root (e.g.
Helgason et al., 1999). Nevertheless, favorable and less favorable
combinations of plant-fungal symbionts have been reported. AM fungi have
also been shown to exert a specific influence on the species composition
of plant communities (van der Heijden et al., 1998). Field studies using
molecular identification methods have demonstrated that distinct fungal
communities are associated with different hosts (Vandenkoornhuyse et
al., 2002).

Although the symbiosis is generally thought to be beneficial, under
certain conditions the balance between the symbionts may be disturbed.
There is evidence that a fungal symbiont may decrease plant growth
(Hendrix et al., 1992). Conversely, certain non-photosynthetic plants
may cheat the fungus by obtaining all their nutrients from them,
including carbohydrates (Bidartondo et al., 2002).

The cross-talk between symbionts and the genes involved in the
establishment and maintenance of the symbiosis have been subject of
intensive research efforts (e.g. see Gianinazzi-Pearson and
Brechenmacher, 2004).

Although the mycorrhizal status of many species placed in this group has
in fact not been demonstrated, only one fungus in the Glomeromycota is
currently known which forms a different type of symbiosis: *Geosiphon
pyriformis*. This fungus produces bladders that harbor symbiotic
cyanobacteria (Schüßler et al., 1994, 1996). Nevertheless, molecular
phylogenetic analysis has shown that *Geosiphon* is a member of the
Glomeromycota (Schüßler et al., 2001).

### Discussion of Phylogenetic Relationships

At the present time, the phylogeny presented here is based entirely on
analyses of the small subunit RNA gene. Although additional genes have
begun to be sequenced from some taxa (e.g. Helgason et al., 2003;
Corradi et al., 2004), phylogenetic hypotheses based on multilocus DNA
sequence data have yet to be incorporated into their classification.

rDNA phylogenies have shown that the genus *Glomus* is several times
polyphyletic (Redecker et al., 2000b; Schwarzott et al., 2001). Species
forming *Glomus*-like spores can be found in six different lineages
within the Glomeromycota. The simple morphology of the spores apparently
has concealed the large genetic variation within the polyphyletic genus
as previously defined. *Paraglomus* appears to be the earliest-diverging
glomeromycotan lineage in rDNA phylogenies, although sometimes receiving
relatively weak bootstrap support. The separation of *Pacispora* and the
*Diversispora* clade from other \"*Glomus*\" lineages\" is
well-supported by rDNA data.

*Glomus* groups A and B (as defined by Schwarzott et al., 2001) are
exemplified by the well-known species *Glomus mosseae* and *Glomus
claroideum*, respectively. The two groups are genetically relatively
distant but still form a monophyletic group in rDNA phylogenetic trees.

The formation of a \"sporiferous saccule\" was once thought to be
characteristic for the Acaulosporaceae (*Acaulospora* and
*Entrophospora*), but now is known to occur in at least one additional
lineage, namely *Archaeospora*. The Gigasporaceae (*Scutellospora* and
*Gigaspora)* are distinhuished by the formation of their spores on a
\"bulbous suspensor\" and are well-supported by molecular data.
Gigasporaceae and Acaulosporaceae form a clade in most rDNA phylogenies,
which is in conflict with previous morphology-based analyses that placed
*Glomus* and Acaulosporaceae together (Morton and Benny, 1990).

### Relationships of Glomeromycota to Other Fungi

The \"Glomales\" were previously placed in the Zygomycota, but the
following evidence indicates that they form a monophyletic group
distinct from other Zygomycotan lineages: their symbiotic habit, the
apparent lack of zygospores and the rDNA phylogeny. Based on this
evidence, Schüßler et al. (2001) erected the phylum Glomeromycota. These
authors also corrected the previously used, grammatically incorrect
ordinal name \"Glomales\" to \"Glomerales\". In phylogenetic trees based
on rDNA, the Glomeromycota are the sister group to Asco- and
Basidiomycota.

### Classification

Since molecular phylogenetic methods have been used to elucidate the
phylogenetic relationships among these fungi, their classification has
been in a rapid transition. Molecular field studies have also revealed a
large number of putative new species (e.g. Vandenkoornhuyse et al.,
2002), suggesting that the 150 morphologically-defined species may
vastly underestimate species diversity .

Traditionally, glomeromycotan taxonomy has been based on the morphology
of the spores. The way the spore is formed on the hypha (\"mode of spore
formation\") has been important to circumscribe genera and families, and
the layer structure of the spore wall to distinguish species (Walker,
1983; Morton, 1988). Some species have a richly ornamented spore surface
(see Figure 2).

![ ](agrd_bw1.jpg)

Figure 2: Spore of *Archaeospora leptoticha* (isolate NC176) cracked
open under a microscope cover slide. The spore wall is multilayered with
a richly ornamented surface. Photo © Dirk Redecker, isolate courtesy of
J. B. Morton at INVAM. Uncracked spore diameter approximately 200 µm.

Glomeromycotan taxonomy is relatively young. Prior to 1974, most AM
fungi were in the genus *Endogone*. However, in 1974 Gerdemann and
Trappe (1974) removed the AM fungi from *Endogone* and placed them in
four separate genera: *Glomus*, *Sclerocystis*, *Acaulospora* and
*Gigaspora*. Unlike the putatively asexual members of the Glomeromycota,
*Endogone* species reproduce sexually via zygospores, indicating their
phylogenetic link with the phylum Zygomycota. Phylogenetic analysis of
the nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA strongly suggests that
*Endogone* (Endogonales) and the Glomeromycota do not form a clade
(Gehrig et al., 1996).

The order Glomales was erected by Morton and Benny (1990) to contain all
AM fungi. At that time two more genera, *Scutellospora* and
*Entrophospora*, had been established by other authors and three
families (Glomaceae, Gigasporaceae and Acaulosporaceae) were recognized.
These families were characterized by the mode of spore formation and
were initially supported by molecular data (Simon et al., 1993).

Since then, it has become clear, however, that the mode of spore
formation is not a useful diagnostic feature for some genera. Spores of
the *Glomus* and *Acaulospora* types were reported to be produced by
several distinct, deeply divergent lineages (Redecker et al., 2000a).
Subsequently, they were described as two new genera *Archaeospora* and
*Paraglomus* (Morton and Redecker, 2001) and placed in separate
families. Because some species in *Archaeospora* were even dimorphic,
members of this genus were classified originally in separate families
(Morton et al., 1997).

Molecular phylogenetic analysis has also shown that species which form
complex sporocarps formerly placed in the genus *Sclerocystis* (Fig.3)
are actually phylogenetically nested within well-characterized *Glomus*
species with simple spores (Redecker et al., 2000b).

![ ](sinuosum_adj2.jpg)

Fig. 3: Section of a sporocarp of *Glomus sinuosum* (isolate MD126,
formerly *Sclerocystis sinuosa*). Spores are arranged around a center of
interwoven hyphae and covered by a \"peridium\". Photo © Dirk Redecker,
isolate courtesy of J. B. Morton at INVAM. Sporocarp diameter
approximately 250 µm.

A new genus *Pacispora* was erected by Oehl and Sieverding (2004),
comprising some former *Glomus* species. The genus name *Gerdemannia*
published for the same fungal group a few weeks later (Walker et al.,
2004), is a synonym of *Pacispora*, and an illegitimate name based on
the publication date. The spores of *Pacispora* have characteristics
intermediate between *Glomus* and the Gigasporaceae.

Another emerging genus split off from *Glomus* (sensu Morton and Benny,
1990) is *Diversispora*. Only one *Glomus* species has been formally
renamed so far (Walker and Schüßler, 2004), mainly based on ribosomal
small subunit sequence signatures.

### Fossil Record

The Glomeromycota are a very old group with an estimated origin of at
least 600 to 620 million years ago. Their evolutionary origin,
therefore, predates the split of the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota
(Berbee and Taylor, 2000; Redecker et al., 2000b). Spores and hyphae of
glomalean fungi were discovered in 460 million year old rocks from the
Ordovician (Redecker et al., 2000b), thus they are among the oldest
recognized fungal fossils to date.

![ ](fossilspore2.jpg)

Fig. 4: Fossil glomeromycotan spore from the Ordovician of Wisconsin
(size bar 50 µm, © American Association for the Advancement of Science
2000)

The oldest arbuscules found thus far were in early land plants from the
Devonian (400 million years ago; Remy et al., 1994). These findings show
that the Glomeromycota were present during the very earliest stages of
the colonization of land by plants, supporting the hypothesis that they
were instrumental in this process (Pirozynski and Malloch, 1975, Simon
et al., 1993; Blackwell, 2000). Today AM fungi are found in most major
lineages of land plants. Although this symbiosis apparently was lost or
replaced by other mycorrhizae several times during the evolution of
terrestrial plant life, it represents the archetypal mycorrhiza.

### References

Becard, G., Pfeffer, P.E., 1993. Status of Nuclear Division in
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi During In-Vitro Development. Protoplasma
174, 62-68.

Berbee, M.L., Taylor, J.W., 2000, Fungal molecular evolution: gene trees
and geologic time, In: McLaughlin, D.J., McLaughlin, E.G., Lemke, P.A.
(Eds.) The Mycota. Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 229-246.

Bianciotto, V., Lumini, E., Lanfranco, L., Minerdi, D., Bonfante, P.,
Perotto, S., 2000. Detection and identification of bacterial
endosymbionts in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi belonging to the family
Gigasporaceae. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 66, 4503-4509.

Bidartondo, M.I., Redecker, D., Hijri, I., Wiemken, A., Bruns, T.D.,
Domínguez, L., Sérsic, A., Leake, J.R., Read, D.J., 2002. Epiparasitic
plants specialized on arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Nature 419, 389-393.

Blackwell, M., 2000. Terrestrial life - Fungal from the start? Science
289, 1884-1885.

Corradi, N., Kuhn, G., Sanders, I.R., 2004. Monophyly of beta-tubulin
and H+-ATPase gene variants in Glomus intraradices: consequences for
molecular evolutionary studies of AM fungal genes. Fungal Genetics and
Biology 41, 262-273.

Fortin, J.A., Becard, G., Declerck, S., Dalpe, Y., St, A.M., Coughlan,
A.P., Piche, Y., 2002. Arbuscular mycorrhiza on root-organ cultures.
Canadian Journal of Botany 80, 1-20.

Gehrig, H., Schüßler, A., Kluge, M., 1996. Geosiphon pyriforme, a fungus
forming endocytobiosis with Nostoc (Cyanobacteria) is an ancestral
member of the glomales: Evidence by SSU rRNA analysis. Journal of
Molecular Evolution 43, 71-81.

Gerdemann, J.W., Trappe, J.M., 1974. Endogonaceae in the Pacific
Northwest. Mycologia Memoirs 5, 1-76.

Gianinazzi-Pearson,. V , Brechenmacher, L . 2004. Functional genomics of
arbuscular mycorrhiza: decoding the symbiotic cell programme. Canadian
Journal of Botany 82, 1228-1234.

Helgason, T., Daniell, T.J., Husband, R., Fitter, A.H., Young, J.P.W.,
1998. Ploughing up the wood-wide web? Nature 394, 431.

Helgason, T., Fitter, A.H., Young, J.P.W., 1999. Molecular diversity of
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonising Hyacinthoides non-scripta
(bluebell) in a seminatural woodland. Molecular Ecology 8, 659-666.

Helgason, T., Watson, I.J., Young, J.P.W., 2003. Phylogeny of the
Glomerales and Diversisporales (Fungi: Glomeromycota) from actin and
elongation factor 1-alpha sequences. FEMS Microbiology Letters 229,
127-132.

Hendrix, J.W., Jones, K.J., Nesmith, W.C., 1992. Control of Pathogenic
Mycorrhizal Fungi in Maintenance of Soil Productivity by Crop-Rotation.
Journal of Production Agriculture 5, 383-386.Hijri, M., Redecker, D.,
Macdonald-Comber Petetot, J.A., Voigt, K., Wöstemeyer, J., Sanders,
I.R., 2002. Identification and isolation of two Ascomycete fungi from
spores of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Scutellospora. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 68, 4567-4573.Hijri, M., Sanders, I.R., 2005.
Low gene copy number shows that arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inherit
genetically different nuclei. Nature 433, 160-163.

Kuhn, G., Hijri, M., Sanders, I.R., 2001. Evidence for the evolution of
multiple genomes in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Nature 414, 745-748.

Morton, J.B., 1988. Taxonomy of VA mycorrhizal fungi: Classification,
nomenclature, and identification. Mycotaxon 32, 267-324.

Morton, J.B., Benny, G.L., 1990. Revised classification of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi (Zygomycetes): A new order Glomales, two new suborders
Glomineae and Gigasporineae and two new families Acaulosporaceae and
Gigasporaceae with an emendation of Glomaceae. Mycotaxon 37, 471-491.

Morton, J.B., Bever, J.D., Pfleger, F.L., 1997. Taxonomy of Acaulospora
gerdemannii and Glomus leptotichum, synanamorphs of an arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungus in Glomales. Mycological Research 101, 625-631.

Morton, J.B., Redecker, D., 2001. Two new families of Glomales,
Archaeosporaceae and Paraglomaceae, with two new genera Archaeospora and
Paraglomus, based on concordant molecular and morphological characters.
Mycologia 93, 181-195.

Oehl, F., Sieverding, E., 2004. Pacispora, a new vesicular arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungal genus in the Glomeromycetes. Journal of Applied
Botany 78, 72-82.

Pawlowska, T., Taylor, J.W., 2004. Organization of genetic variation in
individuals of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Nature 427, 733-737.

Pirozynski, K.A., Malloch, D.W., 1975. The origin of land plants: a
matter of mycotropism. BioSystems 6, 153-164.

Redecker, D., Kodner, R., Graham, L.E., 2000a. Glomalean fungi from the
Ordovician. Science 289, 1920-1921.

Redecker, D., Morton, J.B., Bruns, T.D., 2000b. Ancestral lineages of
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomales). Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 14, 276-284.

Redecker, D., Morton, J.B., Bruns, T.D., 2000c. Molecular phylogeny of
the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi Glomus sinuosum and Sclerocystis
coremioides. Mycologia 92, 282-285.

Remy, W., Taylor, T.N., Hass, H., Kerp, H., 1994. Four
hundred-million-year-old vesicular arbuscular mycorrhizae. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 91,
11841-11843.

Schüßler, A., Mollenhauer, D., Schnepf, E., Kluge, M., 1994. Geosiphon
pyriforme, an endosymbiotic association of fungus and cyanobacteria -
The spore structure resembles that of arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi.
Botanica Acta 107, 36-45.

Schüßler, A.., Bonfante P., Schnepf, E., Mollenhauer, D., Kluge., M
(1996) Characterization of the Geosiphon pyriforme symbiosome by
affinity techniques: confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and
electron microscopy. Protoplasma 190: 53-67

Schüßler, A., Schwarzott, D., Walker, C., 2001. A new fungal phylum, the
Glomeromycota: phylogeny and evolution. Mycological Research 105,
1413-1421.

Schwarzott, D., Walker, C., Schüßler, A., 2001. Glomus, the largest
genus of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomales), is
non-monophyletic. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 21, 190-197.

Sieverding, E., 1991, Vesicular-arbuscular Mycorrhiza Management.
Gesellschaft für technische Zusammenarbeit, Eschborn, Germany.

Simon, L., Bousquet, J., Levesque, R.C., Lalonde, M., 1993. Origin and
diversification of endomycorrhizal fungi and coincidence with vascular
land plants. Nature 363, 67-69.

Smith, S.E., Read, D.J., 1997, Mycorrhizal symbiosis, 2nd Edition.
Academic Press, London.

van der Heijden, M.G.A., Klironomos, J.N., Ursic, M., Moutoglis, P.,
Streitwolf-Engel, R., Boller, T., Wiemken, A., Sanders, I.R., 1998.
Mycorrhizal fungal diversity determines plant biodiversity, ecosystem
variability and productivity. Nature 396, 69-72.

Vandenkoornhuyse, P., Husband, R., Daniell, T.J., Watson, I.J., Duck,
J.M., Fitter, A.H., Young, J.P.W., 2002. Arbuscular mycorrhizal
community composition associated with two plant species in a grassland
ecosystem. Molecular Ecology 11, 1555-1564.

Walker, C., 1983. Taxonomic conceepts in the Endogonaceae: spore wall
characteristics in species descriptions. Mycotaxon 18, 443-455.

Walker, C., Blaszkowski, J., Schüßler, A., 2004. Gerdemannia gen. nov.,
a genus separated from Glomus, and Gerdemanniaceae fam. nov., a new
family in the Glomeromycota. Mycological Research 108, 707-718.

Walker, C., Schüßler, A., 2004. Nomenclatural clarifications and new
taxa in the Glomeromycota. Mycological Research 108, in press.

##### Title Illustrations

![](s328_small.jpg)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Glomus sp. S328
  Comments          Spore of Glomus sp. S328 with attached hypha.
  Size              Spore diameter is approximately 80 µm.
  Copyright ::         © 2000 [American Association for the Advancement of Science](http://www.sciencemag.org/) 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
![](arbuscule.jpg)

  -----------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Glomeromycota
  Comments          Arbuscule within a root cell, stained with Chlorazol Black E.
  Size              Arbuscule diameter is approximately 19 µm
  Copyright ::         © Kerstin Wex
  -----------------------
![](lclr_myc.jpg)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Scientific Name ::  Plantago media, Glomus clarum
  Comments          Roots of Plantago media (plantain) colonized with Glomus clarum. Note the hyphae and spores on the roots.
  Size              Diameter of larger spores is approximately 200 µm
  Copyright ::         © [Dirk Redecker](http://www.unibas.ch/bothebel/people/redecker/redecker.htm) 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------