---
aliases:
has_id_wikidata: Q25560977
opposite_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~encryption,141090]]"
uses:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~key,471771]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~ciphertext,1589480]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~cipher,4681865]]"
facet_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~information_access,593289]]"
product_or_material_produced: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~plaintext,1162538]]"
subclass_of:
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~decoding,5249529]]"
  - "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~cryptographic_data_processing,124726263]]"
practiced_by: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~decipherer,114047905]]"
part_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~cryptography,8789]]"
IEV_number: 171-08-10
---

# [[Decryption]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[_Standards/WikiData/WD~decryption,25560977]] 
#is_/opposite_of :: [[../Encoding/Encryption|Encryption]] 

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> In cryptography, **Encryption** is the process of 
> transforming (more specifically, encoding) information in a way 
> that, ideally, only authorized parties can decode. 
> 
> This process converts the original representation of the information, known as plaintext, 
> into an alternative form known as ciphertext. 
> 
> Despite its goal, encryption is passive, i.e. it __does not itself prevent interference__ 
> but denies the intelligible content to a would-be interceptor.
>
> To prevent guessing, an encryption scheme 
> usually uses a pseudo-random encryption key generated by an algorithm. 
> 
> It is possible to decrypt the message without possessing the key but, 
> for a well-designed encryption scheme, 
> considerable computational resources and skills are required. 
> 
> An authorized recipient can easily decrypt the message with the key 
> provided by the originator to recipients but not to unauthorized users.
>
> Historically, various forms of encryption have been used to aid in cryptography. 
> 
> Early encryption techniques were often used in military messaging. 
> 
> Since then, new techniques have emerged 
> and become commonplace in all areas of modern computing. 
> 
> Modern encryption schemes use the concepts of either public-key or symmetric-key. 
> 
> Modern encryption techniques ensure security, 
> because modern computers are inefficient at cracking the encryption.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encryption) 


## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption](/_Standards/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption.public](/_public/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption.internal](/_internal/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption.protect](/_protect/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption.private](/_private/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption.personal](/_personal/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Decryption.secret](/_secret/Technology/IT/Data/Code/Decoding/Decryption.secret.md)

