---
aliases:
has_id_wikidata: Q6472
subclass_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~evolution,5418608]]"
instance_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~astrophysical_process,15401756]]"
studied_by: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~astrophysics,37547]]"
part_of: "[[_Standards/WikiData/WD~astrophysics,37547]]"
Dewey_Decimal_Classification: "523.88"
video: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:FilePath/The%20life%20cycle%20of%20a%20Sun-like%20star%20%28eso1337a%29.webm
Commons_category: Stellar evolution
---

# [[Stellar_Evolution]] 

#is_/same_as :: [[../../../WikiData/WD~Stellar_evolution,6472|WD~Stellar_evolution,6472]]  

## #has_/text_of_/abstract 

> Stellar evolution is the process by which a star changes over the course of time. 
> 
> Depending on the mass of the star, its lifetime can range 
> - from a few million years for the most massive 
> - to trillions of years for the least massive, 
>   which is considerably longer than the current age of the universe. 
> 
> The table shows the lifetimes of stars as a function of their masses. 
> All stars are formed from collapsing clouds of gas and dust, 
> often called nebulae or molecular clouds.  
> Over the course of millions of years, these protostars settle down into a state of equilibrium, 
> becoming what is known as a main sequence star.
>
> Nuclear fusion powers a star for most of its existence. 
> Initially the energy is generated by the 
> **fusion of hydrogen atoms at the core** of the main-sequence star. 
> Later, as the preponderance of atoms at the core becomes helium, stars like the Sun 
> begin to **fuse hydrogen along a spherical shell** surrounding the core. 
> 
> This process causes the star to gradually grow in size, 
> passing through the subgiant stage until it reaches the red-giant phase. 
> 
> Stars with at least half the mass of the Sun can also begin to 
> generate energy through the **fusion of helium at their core**, whereas 
> more-massive stars can fuse heavier elements along a series of concentric shells. 
> 
> Once a **star like the Sun** has exhausted its nuclear fuel, 
> its core collapses into a **dense white dwarf** 
> and the outer layers are expelled as a planetary nebula. 
> 
> Stars with around ten or more times the mass of the Sun 
> can explode in a **supernova** as their inert iron cores collapse 
> into an extremely dense **neutron star or black hole**. 
> 
> Although the universe is not old enough for any of the smallest 
> **red dwarfs** to have reached the end of their existence, 
> stellar models suggest they will slowly become brighter and hotter 
> before running out of hydrogen fuel and **becoming low-mass white dwarfs**.
>
> Stellar evolution is not studied by observing the life of a single star, 
> as most stellar changes occur too slowly to be detected, even over many centuries. 
> 
> Instead, astrophysicists come to understand how stars evolve 
> by observing numerous stars at various points in their lifetime, 
> and by simulating stellar structure using computer models.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stellar%20evolution) 






## Confidential Links & Embeds: 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution](/_Standards/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution.public](/_public/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.public.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution.internal](/_internal/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.internal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution.protect](/_protect/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.protect.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution.private](/_private/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.private.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution.personal](/_personal/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.personal.md) 

### #is_/same_as :: [Stellar_Evolution.secret](/_secret/Astronomy/Star/Star~Class/Stellar_Evolution.secret.md)

